1 
 
1 
 
USAIS PAMPHLET 350-6 Expert Infantryman Badge 
 
 
 
 
 
TRADOC Regulation 672-9 Expert Soldier Badge 
 
HAND BOOK 
2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1/25 Stryker Brigade Combat Team 
1555 Gaffney Road 
Fort Wainwright, AK 99703 
2 
 
2 
 
Table of Contents 
CANDIDATE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS 
3 
PHASE ONE 
4 
EIB Physical Fitness Assessment & ESB Army Physical Fitness Test of Record 
4 
Expert Infantry Badge (EIB) Fitness Assessment – 
4 
Expert Soldier Badge (ESB) PT Test – 
4 
PHASE TWO 
5 
Land Navigation 
5 
PHASE THREE 
7 
WEAPONS LANE 
7 
W-1 Part I, M4 carbine/M16 rifle 
7 
W-1 Part II, Option I:  M320 grenade launcher 
9 
W-2: Part I; M18 Pistol 
10 
W-2: Part II, Maintain Shotgun 
12 
W-3 Part I, Maintain M249 Squad Automatic Weapon 
14 
W-3 Part II, Operate M249 Squad Automatic Weapon 
16 
W-4 Part I, Maintain M240 
18 
W-4 Part II, Operate M240B Machine Gun 
20 
W-5 Part I, Identify Hand Grenades 
22 
W-5 Part II, Employ Hand Grenades Against Troops in The Open 
23 
W-5 Part III, Employ Hand Grenades Through a Window, Door or Bunker 
25 
W-6 M18A1 Claymore Mine (Electronic Initiation) 
27 
W-7: Javelin 
31 
W-8: M-2 Machine Gun 
33 
W-9: MK-19 Heavy Grenade Launcher 
35 
W-10: Anti-Tank Weapons (Carl Gustaf 84-Mm Recoilless Rifle) 
37 
ESB-1: Arctic Skills, Employ an Ahkio Sled 
39 
ESB-2: Arctic Skills; Employ Individual Camouflage in A Snow-Covered Environment 
40 
MEDICAL LANE 
40 
M-1: Request Medical Evacuation 
41 
M-2: Provide Care Under Fire and Move A Casualty 
43 
M-3:  Perform First Aid to Restore Breathing And/or Pulse 
46 
M-4: Evaluate A Casualty for a Heat Injury 
50 
M-5: Control Bleeding 
52 
M-6: Evaluate and Treat a Casualty 
54 
M-7: Apply an occlusive dressing and perform a needle chest decompression 
57 
M-8: Perform First Aid for an Open Head Wound in a CBRNE Environment 
60 
M-9: Treat an Open Abdominal Wound and Eye Injuries 
62 
M-10: Treat a Fracture and a Burn 
64 
PATROL LANE 
65 
P-1: Adjust Indirect Fire 
66 
P-2: Move Under Direct Fire 
69 
P-3: Tactical Handheld Radio 
71 
P-4: Defense Advanced GPS Receiver (DAGR) Operations 
73 
P-5: Camouflage and Visual Signaling Techniques 
74 
P-7: Chemical and Biological Operations 
77 
P-8: Resection and Military Maps 
80 
P-9: Operate PVS-14 Monocular Night Vision Device 
83 
P-10: Transmit a SPOT Report with a Tactical Man Pack Radio 
85 
ESB-3: Arctic Focus, (ECWCS) Protect Yourself in Extreme Cold Weather. 
88 
ESB-4: Arctic Focus, Identify and Perform First Aid for Cold Weather Injuries 
91 
ESB-5: Arctic Focus, Evacuate A Hypothermic Casualty 
95 
PHASE FOUR 
95 
12-Mile Foot March 
95 
Final event: Clear, disassemble, assemble, and perform a function check on M16/M4 series rifle/carbine 
96 
 
 
 
3 
3 
CANDIDATE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS 
Candidates must meet the following requirements:  
(a) Must be an active member of the U.S. Army, ARNG, or USAR.
(b) Enlisted personnel must possess a CMF 11 or CMF 18 MOS as their primary MOS for the 
EIB. Enlisted personnel in all other CMFs as their primary MOS are eligible for the ESB. 
EIB Personnel holding the 18DMOS are not eligible to test for the EIB. Secondary and 
additional Military Occupational Skills will not be considered in meeting this 
requirement.
(c) Officers must be branch qualified as Infantry or Special Forces. Officers who are branch 
detailed to the Infantry may test for the EIB as long as they have completed the Infantry 
Officer Basic Course and are still assigned to the Infantry from the donor branch in 
accordance with AR 614-100. Officers in all other Branches are eligible for the ESB.
(d) Must meet all height and weight requirements outlined in AR 600-9.
(e) Must have passed an Army Physical Fitness Test within six months.
(f) Must not be flagged.
(g) Must have qualified expert with the M4 Carbine or M16 Rifle on a 300-meter Automated 
Record Fire (ARF) range within six months of testing for the EIB / ESB in accordance 
with TC 3-22.9. ARNG and USAR personnel must have qualified expert within one year 
of testing for the EIB / ESB. This prerequisite cannot be used to offset any testing 
requirements which occur within the EIB / ESB process. In instances where a 300-meter 
ARF range is not accessible to the Unit, qualification on the ALT-C course is acceptable; 
however, the Unit will need to justify their inability to access a 300-meter ARF range via 
memorandum to the EIB Test Manager. The waiver(s) must include the individual names, 
and be accompanied by their respective ARF scorecards (within one year), and ALT C 
qualification (within six months). Both must show that the Candidate qualified expert, 
scoring at least 36 points. This waiver must be approved prior to validation. ALT-C is not 
permitted in order to provide an additional attempt for weapons qualification for 
personnel who have been afforded an opportunity to qualify on a 300-meter ARF range 
prior to EIB / ESB testing.
(h) Must have received the recommendation of their current Commander to participate in 
testing and have a reasonable expectation of passing all events.
(i) Personnel who have received a permanent medical profile may test for the EIB/ ESB as 
long as their profile will not prevent them from taking part in any of the required events.
(j) Company Commanders or equivalent are responsible for certifying that their Soldiers 
meet all eligibility requirements to test for the EIB/ ESB and are required to provide a 
roster of their Candidates, with supporting documentation, to the EIB/ ESB Board. In 
order to maintain the integrity of the test, an approved sworn statement by each Battalion 
Commander or higher must be submitted to the EIB/ ESB Test Manager during the 
validation process.
4 
 
4 
 
PHASE ONE 
EIB Physical Fitness Assessment & ESB Army Physical Fitness Test of Record 
This event constitutes Phase One of the EIB / ESB test and may only be graded by EIB / 
ESB Graders. It is the responsibility of the EIB / ESB Board to ensure all Graders for this event 
are grading to the same standard without variance. The EIB / ESB Board will establish this 
standard in accordance with existing regulations. Candidates are required to pass each event; 
failing to do so will result in a NO-GO and the Candidate will be eliminated from the EIB / ESB 
test. Candidates failing this task should be segregated in a separate holding area until they can be 
processed by the NCOIC/OIC, followed by the EIB / ESB NCOIC/OIC for out-processing. No 
Candidate who fails the EPFA or APFTOR will progress to Phase Two.  The EPFA and 
APFTOR is the first graded event of the EIB / ESB test. 
The fitness tests will be administered in the same fashion as an Army Physical Fitness 
Test (APFT), based on the standards outlined in TC 3-22.20. The only difference will be the 
number of push-ups and sit-ups required and the length of the run. While Units can allow 
Candidates to execute push-ups and sit-ups beyond the minimum requirements, they may also 
stop Candidates once the minimum has been reached, as this will reduce the time required to test 
all Candidates. Candidates who fail any event should be stopped immediately and directed to a 
different holding area to be processed for elimination from the EIB/ ESB test. Units should 
ensure that the EPFA and APFTOR site complies with current APFT regulations. The site must 
be well lit to facilitate grading/control and the four-mile run route must be clearly marked. An 
adequate number of medical personnel/safety vehicles must be available and proper risk 
management incorporated into the event. 
Expert Infantry Badge (EIB) Fitness Assessment –  
EIB Candidates are required to perform 49 push-ups in two minutes, 59 sit-ups in two 
minutes, and a four-mile run in 32 minutes. This is a GO or NO- GO event which must be passed 
in order for a Candidate to remain in the EIB process. This event is not re-testable.  
(1) All candidates must pass the EPFA.  
(2) EPFA cannot be waived.  
(3) Alternate EPFA events are not authorized.  
(4) EPFA testing will be conducted in accordance with Field Manual (FM) 7-22.  
(5) All candidates must meet height and weight requirements in accordance with Army 
Regulation (AR 600-9) 
Expert Soldier Badge (ESB) PT Test –  
Army Physical Fitness Test of Record (APFTOR). The APFTOR is a prerequisite 
to participate in the ESB. RA candidates must have passed the APFTOR within six 
months prior to ESB testing day 1. ARNG and USAR candidates must have passed the 
APFTOR within one year of ESB testing day 1. ESB candidates must achieve 80% in 
each APFT event: Push-up, Sit-up, and 2 mile run in their respective age group. No 
alternate events are authorized. ESB candidates must pass the APFTOR within the limits 
of their profile, if any. 
(1) All candidates must pass the APFTOR.  
(2) APFTOR cannot be waived.  
(3) Alternate APFTOR events are not authorized.  
(4) APFTOR testing will be conducted in accordance with Field Manual (FM) 7-22.  
(5) All candidates must meet height and weight requirements in accordance with Army 
Regulation (AR) 600-9. 
 
 
5 
 
5 
 
 
PHASE TWO 
Land Navigation 
Task: Candidates will demonstrate their individual proficiency in navigating from one point to 
another, while dismounted, without the aid of electronic navigation devices. Candidates must 
pass day and night land navigation in order to receive a GO for this event. Failing land 
navigation will eliminate the Candidate from the EIB/ ESB test. This event is not re-testable.  
Candidate Conditions: Candidates will have a 1:50,000-scale military topographic map, 
lensatic compass, protractor, and writing instrument. They will be provided with a score sheet, 
four 10-digit grids of the points they have to find, a 10-digit grid to their known release point, 
and a 10-digit grid to their end point. Units must have a calibration site for the Candidates to 
verify their compass. Candidates will complete both iterations while in the EIB / ESB uniform 
and will be checked upon arrival to ensure they have no electronic equipment to assist them. If 
the Unit desires that Candidates have a cell phone, they must be turned off and sealed inside a 
non-transparent mailing envelope, evidence bag, etc.  
Land Navigation Course Conditions: The navigation courses utilized for train-up and testing 
must have all points validated through a site survey conducted by an Engineer/Field Artillery 
Unit. If unable to use a validated course, validation may be accomplished as follows:  
1) At least two GPS devices to obtain a ten-digit grid per point; less than 20-meter 
difference between devices. 
2) All GPS devices used in the validation of the course must be the same model. Using a 
DAGR and a PLGR together to validate a course would not be acceptable due to the 
accuracy differences. 
3) Courses will not be validated with civilian GPS models under any circumstances. 
4) Unit will make all efforts to use two different land navigation courses for train-up and 
testing. If the same land navigation course is used the Unit will need to change the 
location of all points prior to testing. 
5) The EIB/ ESB Board is responsible for certifying the navigation course prior to the start 
of train-up and again before testing. Certification differs from validation process and 
consists of having EIB/ ESB Graders negotiate each lane to confirm:  
6) All points are present, in good condition, and have a reasonable expectation of being 
located. 
7) The validation parameters from previous surveys remain in effect. 
8) All points are equipped with a unique navigation punch to ensure Candidates were 
physically at the point. 
9) Lanes consist of a known release point, four navigation points, and a known end point 
(may be same as release point). Units may create as many release points as necessary 
based on the number of lanes/Candidates. The distance between points is 800-1000 
meters during day and 600-800 during night. The total distance of a lane will not exceed 
4500 meters during day and 3500 during night. The total includes the distance traveled 
from the Release Point to the End Point. If the course contains dense vegetation/limited 
visibility and the moon luminosity/weather conditions are poor, each point may be 
marked with a single blue glow stick at night. The Unit will not use a self-correcting 
course during testing; no points will have any identifying grid locations. The points must 
be clearly visible and free of obstructions within a 10-meter radius. No Candidate will 
have any of the same points during testing that they had during training.  
6 
 
6 
10) The NCOIC must have a spreadsheet that clearly shows all the requirements outlined in 
this paragraph; this spreadsheet will be inspected during validation. Day navigation will 
be conducted after sunrise and before End of Evening Nautical Twilight (EENT). Night 
navigation will be conducted after EENT and before sunrise. 
11) Standards: The following standards will apply for all Candidates conducting the land 
navigation course: 
12) Candidates stage at a known release point after receiving their points, course orientation 
brief, and safety brief. At the direction of the land navigation NCOIC/OIC, Candidates 
will be given the signal to start and official timing will begin. Units may use a staggered 
release to provide better control/reduce congestion. 
13) Candidates record the identification for each of their navigation points as well as punch 
their score card with the punch provided at each point. Candidate must have their map 
and scorecard upon return. 
Standards: Candidates have three hours to correctly locate three out of four of the navigation 
points on their lane, return to the end point, and report to the EIB Graders. Upon reporting to the 
Graders, the Candidate’s completion time will be recorded on the score card. Candidates will not 
be permitted to re-enter the course, even if they have returned before time has expired. 
 
Candidates failing this task will be segregated in a holding area until they can be processed by 
the NCOIC/OIC, followed by the EIB/ ESB NCOIC/OIC for out-processing. No Candidate who 
fails land navigation will continue. 
 
 
7 
 
7 
PHASE THREE 
WEAPONS LANE 
W-1 Part I, M4 carbine/M16 rifle 
Task basis:  071-COM-0028-Load an M16-Series Rifle/M4-Series Carbine, 071-COM-0027-
Unload an M16-Series Rifle/M4-Series Carbine, 071-COM-0030-Engage Targets with an M16-
Series Rifle/M4-Series Carbine. 
Tasks:  Clear, load, fire until stoppage occurs, perform immediate action, expend remaining 
ammunition, unload, and clear an M4/M16. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting combat operations.  You have a stoppage 
while engaging targets with yourM4/M16. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all steps, in sequence, in 30 seconds or less. 
Requirements:  An M4/M16 with blank adaptor, and sling.  Starting configuration for the 
weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, bolt forward, on FIRE (SEMI/BURST/AUTO), and the 
trigger pulled.  A magazine loaded with four blank rounds of ammunition and one 
inert/expended round.  A target/safe direction. Hearing protection (part of the ESB uniform) 
must be worn when firing.  
Note:  Candidate will start with the weapon in the low ready position. 
Performance steps: 
1) Clear the weapon: 
(a) Keep the weapon pointed in a safe direction. 
(b) Attempt to place the weapon on SAFE. 
(c) Lock the bolt to the rear. 
(d) Pull the charging handle rearward.  Press and hold the bottom of the bolt catch. 
(e) Allow bolt to move forward until it engages the bolt catch.  Release the bottom of the bolt 
catch. 
(f) Return the charging handle to the forward position. 
(g) Ensure the receiver and chamber are free of ammo.  Place weapon on SAFE. 
2) Load the weapon: 
(a) Insert the magazine. 
(b) Push the magazine upwards until the magazine catch engages. 
(c) Tap upward on the bottom of the magazine to ensure the magazine is seated. 
(d) Press the upper portion of the bolt catch allowing the bolt to go forward and chamber a 
round. The bolt will not be ridden forward. 
(e) Tap forward assist to ensure that bolt is fully forward and locked. 
(f) The weapon is now loaded. 
3) Place the weapon on SEMI and begin engaging your target. 
4) Perform immediate action: 
(a) Tap the bottom of the magazine firmly. 
(b) Rapidly pull charging handle and release to extract/eject previous cartridge and 
feed/chamber/lock new round. 
(c) Reassess by continuing the shot process. Weapon should fire.  If weapon does not fire, 
proceed to remedial action (for this task, move to clear the weapon). 
5) Clear the weapon: 
(a) Point weapon in safe direction.  Attempt to place weapon on SAFE. 
(b) Remove magazine from weapon. 
(c) Lock the bolt open (if not already). 
8 
 
8 
(d) Pull the charging handle rearward.  Press the bottom of the bolt catch. 
(e) Move bolt forward until it engages bolt catch. Return the charging handle to the forward 
position. 
(f) Ensure the receiver and chamber are free of ammo. 
(g) Place the weapon on SAFE (if not already). 
(h) Press the upper portion of the bolt catch to allow the bolt to go forward. 
(i) Close the ejection port cover. 
Table W-1 Part I:  M4/M16 carbine/rifle 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Load the weapon. 
3.  Engage the target. 
4.  Perform immediate action. 
5.  Clear the weapon. 
 
 
 
9 
 
9 
W-1 Part II, Option I:  M320 grenade launcher 
Task basis:  071-031-0002-Load an M320 Grenade Launcher, 071-031-0003-Unload an M320 
grenade launcher  
Tasks:  Clear, load, and fire an M320 grenade launcher.  Unload and clear an M320 that has not 
been fired. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting dismounted operations.  
Standards:  Correctly clear, load, and fire the grenade launcher in 20 seconds.  Correctly unload 
and clear the grenade launcher within 20 seconds.  You must not drop the 40-mm ammunition.  
All tasks will be performed in sequence. 
Requirements:  An M320 Grenade Launcher; may be attached to the same rifle/carbine used in 
Part 1, a separate rifle/carbine, or in detached operation.  If using a rifle/carbine, the rifle must 
have an empty magazine.  A target/safe direction for the candidate to engage and a 
dummy/training round.  If the ESB uniform does not include a grenade pouch, the station will 
provide appropriate load bearing equipment to properly secure the grenade. 
Note:  Candidate will start with the weapon in the low ready and the grenade secured in the 
appropriate pouch. 
Performance steps: 
1) Clear, load, and fire: 
(a) Point the weapon in a safe direction.  Ensure weapon is on SAFE. 
(b) Press barrel release and pivot barrel out from receiver. 
(c) Make sure bore and chamber is clear of round or spent cartridge. Insert a single round of 
ammunition into barrel.   
(d) Ensure cartridge is seated fully forward in rear of barrel. Pivot barrel into receiver until 
barrel locking lever engages barrel. There should be an audible click when the barrel 
locking lever engages barrel. 
(e) Place the weapon on fire. 
2) Engage your target. 
Note:  Candidate will start from the last position in the previous task. 
3) Unload and clear an unfired round: 
(a) Keep the weapon pointed in a safe direction, with trigger finger outside trigger guard. 
(b) Place the weapon on SAFE. 
(c) Press upward on barrel release lever and pivot barrel out from receiver. 
(d) Grasp rim of round. Pull rearward to remove round or cartridge case from the barrel. 
(e) Secure the round back in the appropriate pouch. 
(f) Pivot barrel into receiver until barrel release lever engages barrel. 
(g) Ensure weapon is still on SAFE. 
W-1 Part II:  M320 grenade launcher 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon 
2.  Load the weapon 
3.  Engage the target 
4.  Unload and clear an unfired round 
 
 
 
10 
 
10 
W-2: Part I; M18 Pistol 
Task basis:  071-004-0007-Maintain an M17/M18 pistol, 071-004-0008-Perform a function 
check on an M17/M18 pistol. 
Tasks:  Clear, disassemble, assemble, and perform a function check on an M17/M18 pistol 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team that has just returned from a mission and you have 
been directed to conduct maintenance on your pistol. 
Standards:  Correctly clear and disassemble the M17/M18 pistol, matching the parts with the 
correct nomenclature labels within 30 seconds.  Correctly assemble and perform a function check 
on the M17/M18 pistol within 45 seconds.  All tasks will be performed in sequence. 
Requirements:  An M17/M18 pistol with magazine.  A target/safe direction for the candidate to 
point the weapon. Starting configuration for the weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, loaded 
with an empty magazine, bolt forward, on FIRE, material/flat surface that will prevent the 
candidate from losing parts to the weapon.  An area for the candidate to place the weapons parts 
with the appropriate nomenclature labels. Photos of the parts with nomenclature labels will be 
available in the training area.  Other authorized Army pistol may be substituted based on the 
unit’s inventory; use the standards outlined in that weapon’s TM for clear, disassemble, 
assemble, and perform a functions check. 
Performance steps: 
Note:  Candidate will start from a standing position with the weapon resting on the flat surface. 
1) Clear the weapon. 
(a) Point the pistol in a safe direction for the duration of the event.  
(b) Place the safety lever in the safe (down) position 
(c) Depress the magazine release and remove the magazine from the pistol. 
(d) Grasp the slide serrations and fully retract the slide. 
(e) Lock the slide to the rear using the slide stop. 
(f) Visually inspect the chamber, magazine well, and bolt face to ensure it is clear.  Release 
the slide forward. 
2) Disassemble the weapon into the following components, ensuring all parts are on the correct 
nomenclature labels: 
(a) Magazine. 
(b) Receiver. 
(c) Barrel. 
(d) Slide assembly. 
(e) Recoil spring guide assembly. 
Note:  Time will stop when the candidate returns to the standing position with all parts of the 
weapon on the flat surface. 
3) Assemble the pistol: 
Note:  Candidate will start from the last position in the previous task. 
(a) Grasp the slide with the bottom facing up. 
(b) Grasp the barrel assembly with the locking block facing up with the other hand. 
(c) Insert the muzzle into the forward end of the slide and simultaneously, lower the rear of 
the barrel assembly by moving the barrel slightly. 
Note:  The barrel will fall into place. 
(d) Insert the recoil spring guide into the recoil spring. 
11 
 
11 
(e) Insert the end of the recoil spring and the recoil spring guide into the recoil spring 
housing and simultaneously, compress the recoil spring and lower the spring guide until it 
is fully seated on the locking block cutaway. 
(f) Push the firing pin block lever down. 
(g) Grasp the slide and barrel assembly with the sights up and align the slide on the receiver 
assembly guide rails. 
(h) Push until the rear of the slide is a short distance beyond the rear of the receiver assembly 
and hold, simultaneously, rotate the disassembly latch lever upward. 
Note:  A click indicates a positive lock 
4) Perform a functions check: 
Note:  Candidate will start from the last position in the previous task. 
(a) Insert an empty magazine into magazine well. Ensure magazine catch engages and locks 
magazine in place. 
(b) Push up on manual safety lever to engage safety. 
(c) Grasp slide serrations and pull the slide to rear until it locks.  The magazine follower 
should push up on slide stop, locking slide to rear. Press the magazine catch.  The 
magazine will fall free from pistol. 
(d) Press the slide catch. This will release the slide to the forward position.  Ensure the slide 
is fully forward on the pistol. 
(e) Press the trigger. The striker should not be released. 
(f) Depress manual safety lever. 
(g) Press trigger and hold to rear. Striker should be released. An audible click should be 
heard. 
(h) While still holding trigger to rear, fully retract and release slide. 
(i) Release trigger. A light audible click should be heard and felt as the striker resets. 
(j) Press trigger. The striker should release and you should hear and feel a loud audible click. 
Note: Time will stop when the candidate returns to the standing position with the weapon on the 
flat surface. 
W-2:PART I Maintain M17/M18 pistol 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Disassemble the weapon. 
3.  Assembled the weapon. 
4.  Perform a functions check. 
 
 
 
12 
 
12 
W-2: Part II, Maintain Shotgun 
Based on: ARMY Technical Manual 9-1005-338-13&P 
Task: Clear, Disassemble, Assemble, and Perform a Functions Check on an M500 series 
Shotgun. 
Condition: You are a member of a team that has just returned from a mission and you have been 
directed to conduct maintenance on your Shotgun. 
Standard: Correctly clear and disassemble the M500 series Shotgun, matching the parts with the 
correct nomenclature labels within one minute. Correctly assemble and perform a function check 
on the M500 series Shotgun within two minutes. All steps will be performed in sequence. 
Requirements: An M500 series Shotgun, free of ammunition and on SAFE. A safe direction for 
the Candidate to point weapon. Material/flat surface that will prevent Candidate from losing 
parts to weapon with appropriate nomenclature labels. Photos of the parts with nomenclature 
labels will be available in the training area. A Remington 870 or other authorized Army shotgun 
may be substituted based on the Unit’s inventory; use the standards in that weapon’s TM. The 
870 will take 30 seconds to clear/disassemble, and 30 seconds to assemble/perform a functions 
check. 
Performance Measures: 
Candidate will start from a standing position with the weapon resting on the flat surface. 
1) Clear the weapon. 
(a) Point the weapon in a safe direction. 
(b) Ensure the weapon on safe (fully to the rear). 
(c) Depress the action lock lever, and open the action by sliding the forearm fully rearward. 
(d) Observe the chamber, visually checking for ammunition, ensuring magazine plug is 
visible. 
2) Disassemble the weapon into the following components, ensuring all parts are on the correct 
nomenclature labels. 
(a) Receiver assembly. 
(b) Barrel assembly. 
(c) Magazine cap (M590 only). 
(d) Trigger housing retainer pin. 
(e) Trigger mechanism. 
(f) Cartridge interrupter. 
(g) Cartridge stop. 
(h) Bolt slide. 
(i) Bolt. 
(j) Fore end assembly. 
(k) Elevator. 
Time will stop when the Candidate returns to the standing position with all parts of the weapon 
on the flat surface. 
Candidate will start from the last position in the previous task. 
3) Assemble the weapon, ensuring it is on safe. 
4) Perform a functions check. 
(a) Close the action fully. The action lock should be fully down. 
(b) Pull the trigger; the hammer should NOT fall. 
(c) Move the safety forward to the FIRE position. 
(d) Pull the trigger; hammer should fall and the lock lever should be fully up. 
13 
 
13 
(e) Hold trigger to the rear; re-cock the weapon by moving the forearm fully to the rear and 
then forward. 
(f) Release the trigger; hammer should NOT fall and trigger should return to its forward 
position. 
(g) Pull trigger; hammer should fall and the lock lever should be fully up 
(h) Release trigger and re-cock the weapon. The hammer should NOT fall. 
(i) Move the safety rearward to the SAFE position. 
Time will stop when the Candidate returns to the standing position with the weapon on the flat  
surface. 
Table. W-2:PART II Maintain Shotgun 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Disassemble the weapon. 
3.  Assembled the weapon. 
4.  Perform a functions check. 
 
 
 
14 
 
14 
W-3 Part I, Maintain M249 Squad Automatic Weapon 
Task basis:  071-COM-4025-Maintain an M249 machine gun, 071-COM-4026-Perform a 
function check on an M249 machine gun  
Tasks:  Clear, disassemble, assemble, and perform a function check on an M249 Machine Gun. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team that has just returned from a mission and you have 
been directed to conduct maintenance on your M249 Machine Gun. 
Standards:  Correctly clear and completely disassemble the M249 Machine Gun, matching the 
groups with the correct nomenclature within three minutes.  Correctly assemble and perform a 
function check on the M249 Machine Gun within three minutes.  All tasks will be performed in 
sequence. 
Requirements:  An M249, on a flat surface, with the bipod legs extended.  Starting 
configuration for weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, on FIRE, with bolt forward.  Basic 
maintenance tools, target/safe direction for candidate to point weapon, material/flat surface that 
will prevent candidate from losing parts to the weapon with appropriate nomenclature group 
labels.  Photos of parts with nomenclature labels will be available in training area.  Use separate 
weapon for part I and part II ensuring to have enough for your projected number of candidates.  
Performance steps: 
1. Clear the weapon 
(a) Point weapon in a safe direction.  Ensure safety is on FIRE before moving bolt/operating 
rod assembly. 
(b) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(c) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to SAFE. 
(d) Push the cocking handle assembly to the fully forward and locked position. 
(e) Push in the feed cover latches, look in a safe direction, raise the feed cover, and conduct a 
five-point safety check for brass, links, or ammunition. 
1. Check the feed pawl assembly under the cover. 
2. Check the feed tray.  Lift the feed tray and inspect the chamber. 
3. Check the space between the face of the bolt and the chamber  
4. Check the space under the bolt/operating rod assembly. 
5. Check the magazine well. 
(f) Lower the feed tray, close the feed cover, making sure it locks shut. 
(g) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear.  
(h) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to FIRE. 
(i) While fully depressing the trigger, ease the bolt forward with right hand palm up to close 
and lock.  Release the trigger. 
(j) Attempt to place the safety to SAFE; safety must not be able to be moved to SAFE. 
2. Disassemble weapon into the following groups, ensuring all parts are on the correct 
nomenclature labels: 
1. Driving spring mechanism rod 
2. Spring 
3. Trigger mechanism 
4. Bolt carrier 
5. Bolt 
15 
 
15 
6. Gas operating rod 
7. Hand guard 
8. Heat shield 
9. Bipod legs 
10. Barrel 
11. Gas regulator 
12. Gas regulator collar 
13. Gas tube 
14. Receiver with feed tray and feed tray cover assembly 
3. Assemble the weapon. 
4. Perform a functions check: 
Note:  Ensure the safety is on FIRE before moving the bolt/operating rod assembly. 
(a) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(b) While holding to rear with right hand palm up, with no tension on bolt, place on SAFE 
and depress trigger.  Weapon should not fire. 
(c) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up, with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to FIRE, and depress the trigger.  Ease the bolt forward to close 
and lock.  Release the trigger. 
(d) Attempt to place on SAFE; safety must not be able to be moved to SAFE.  Close ejection 
port cover. 
Note: Time will stop when the candidate returns to the standing position with the weapon on the 
flat surface. 
Table W-3 Part I:  Maintain M249 squad automatic weapon 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Disassemble the weapon 
3.  Assemble the weapon 
4.  Perform functions check 
 
 
 
16 
 
16 
W-3 Part II, Operate M249 Squad Automatic Weapon 
Task basis:  071-COM-4027-Load an M249 machine gun, 071-COM-4029-correct malfunctions 
of an M249 machine gun, 071-COM-4028-unload an M249 machine gun 
Tasks:  Clear, load, fire until a stoppage occurs, perform immediate action, expend remaining 
ammunition, unload, and clear an M249 machine gun. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting combat operations.  You have a stoppage 
while engaging targets with your machine gun. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all steps, in sequence, within 30 seconds.  
Requirements:  An M249 machine gun and blank adaptor with blank ammunition; at least three 
good blank rounds, followed by one expended round, and three more good rounds.  Starting 
configuration for the weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, on FIRE, with the bolt forward.  A 
target/safe direction for the candidate to point the weapon.  The weapon can alternatively be 
mounted on a vehicle or other type of fighting position.  Hearing protection (part of the ESB 
uniform) must be worn when firing. 
Note:  Candidate will start in the prone position not touching the weapon. 
Performance steps: 
1. Clear the weapon: 
(k) Point weapon in a safe direction.  Ensure safety is on FIRE before moving bolt/operating 
rod assembly. 
(l) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(m) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to SAFE. 
(n) Push the cocking handle assembly to the fully forward and locked position. 
(o) Push in the feed cover latches, look in a safe direction, raise the feed cover, and conduct a 
five-point safety check for brass, links, or ammunition. 
6. Check the feed pawl assembly under the cover. 
7. Check the feed tray.  Lift the feed tray and inspect the chamber. 
8. Check the space between the face of the bolt and the chamber  
9. Check the space under the bolt/operating rod assembly. 
10. Check the magazine well. 
(p) Lower the feed tray. 
2. Load the weapon: 
(a) Raise the feed cover 
(b) Place link belt on feed tray with the first round against the cartridge stop with the tips of 
the rounds pointing towards the barrel.  Tilt the weapon to the right and/or hold the 
ammunition belt in place if necessary. 
(c) Close the feed cover. Ensure the latches lock into place. Make sure rounds do not move 
away from cartridge stop during closing and latching of cover. 
(d) Place the weapon on FIRE and engage your target. 
3. Take immediate action to correct a malfunction: 
Note:  Weapon remains on shoulder while performing immediate action. 
(a) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
17 
 
17 
(b) Observe ejection port to see if a cartridge case/belt link/round ejects.  If not, place on 
SAFE while holding cocking handle to rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
bolt. 
(c) (Push) Return cocking handle to forward and locked position and proceed to clear 
weapon.  If a cartridge/belt link/round ejects, push the cocking handle forward. 
(d) Squeeze the trigger and continue mission. Proceed to clear the weapon if it does not fire. 
4. Unload and clear the weapon: 
(a) Point weapon in a safe direction. 
(b) If the bolt is forward, ensure the safety is on FIRE before moving the bolt/operating rod 
assembly.  If the bolt is fully locked to the rear, ensure the safety is on SAFE and proceed 
to step (5) (f) below. 
(c) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(d) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to SAFE. 
(e) Return the cocking handle assembly to the fully forward and locked position. 
(f) Push in feed cover latches, look in a safe direction, raise feed cover, and conduct a five-
point safety check, per step (1)(e) above. 
(g) Lower the feed tray and close the feed cover, making sure it locks shut. 
(h) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear. 
(i) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to FIRE. 
(j) While depressing trigger, ease bolt forward to close and lock.  Release trigger.  Close 
ejection port cover. 
Table W-3 Part II:  Operate M249 machine gun 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Load the weapon 
3.  Engaged the target 
4.  Take immediate action 
5.  Unload and clear the weapon 
 
 
 
18 
 
18 
W-4 Part I, Maintain M240 
Task basis:  071-025-0001-Maintain an M240B machine gun, 071-025-0002-Perform a function 
check on an M240B machine gun  
Tasks:  clear, disassemble, assemble, and perform a function check on an M240 machine gun. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team that has just returned from a mission and you have 
been directed to conduct maintenance on your M240 machine gun. 
Standards:  Correctly clear and disassemble the M240 machine gun, matching the parts with the 
correct nomenclature labels within three minutes.  Correctly assemble and perform a function 
check on the M240 machine gun within 3 minutes.  All tasks will be performed in sequence. 
Requirements:  An M240 machine gun, on a flat surface, with the bipod legs extended.  Starting 
configuration for the weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, on FIRE, with the bolt forward.  
Basic maintenance tools.  A target/safe direction for the candidate to point the weapon.  
Material/flat surface that will prevent candidate from losing parts to weapon.  An area for 
candidate to place weapons parts with appropriate group nomenclature labels.  Photos of parts 
with nomenclature labels will be available in the training area.  Use separate weapon systems for 
part one and part two, ensuring to have enough for your projected number of candidates. 
Note:  Candidate will start from a standing position with the weapon resting on the flat surface.   
Performance steps: 
1. Clear the weapon: 
(a) Point weapon in a safe direction. Ensure safety is on FIRE before moving the 
bolt/operating rod assembly. 
(b) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(c) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to SAFE. 
(d) Release the cocking handle assembly to the fully forward and locked position. 
(e) Push in feed cover latches, look in a safe direction, raise feed cover, and conduct a four-
point safety check for brass/links/ammunition.  
1. Check feed pawl assembly under cover. 
2. Check feed tray.  Lift feed tray and inspect chamber. 
3. Check between face of bolt and chamber  
4. Check under bolt/operating rod assembly. 
(f) Lower the feed tray and close the feed cover, making sure it locks shut. 
(g) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear. 
(h) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to FIRE. 
(i) While fully depressing the trigger, ease the bolt forward to close and lock.  Release the 
trigger. 
(j) Attempt to place the safety to SAFE; safety must not be able to be moved to SAFE. 
2. Disassemble the weapon into the following groups, ensuring all parts are on the correct 
nomenclature labels: 
(a) Buttstock and buffer assembly 
(b) Bolt and operating rod assembly 
(c) Driving spring rod assembly 
(d) Trigger housing assembly 
(e) Barrel assembly; removing heat shield 
19 
 
19 
(f) Cover assembly 
(g) Feed tray 
(h) Receiver assembly 
Note:  Time will stop when the candidate returns to the standing position with all parts of the 
weapon on the flat surface. 
3. Assemble the weapon. 
4. Perform a functions check, 
(a) Ensure the safety is on FIRE before moving the bolt/operating rod assembly. 
(b) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(c) While holding handle to rear with right hand palm up, with no tension on bolt, place on 
SAFE and depress trigger.  Weapon should not fire. 
(d) While holding the cocking handle to the rear with right hand palm up, with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to FIRE, and depress the trigger.  Ease the bolt forward to close 
and lock.  Release the trigger. 
(e) Attempt to place on SAFE; safety must not be able to be moved to SAFE. 
(f) Close ejection port cover. 
Note:  Time will stop when the candidate returns to the standing position with the weapon on the 
flat surface. 
Table W4 Part I: Maintain an M240B machine gun 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Disassemble the weapon. 
3.  Assemble the weapon. 
4.  Perform a functions check. 
 
 
 
20 
 
20 
W-4 Part II, Operate M240B Machine Gun 
Task basis: 071-025-0003-Load an M240B machine gun, 071-025-0005-Correct malfunctions 
of an M240B/M240L machine gun, 071-025-0004-Unload an M240B machine gun 
Tasks:  Clear, load, fire until a stoppage occurs, perform immediate action, expend remaining 
ammunition, unload, and clear an M240 machine gun. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting combat operations.  You have a stoppage 
while engaging targets with your machine gun. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all steps, in sequence, within 30 seconds. 
Requirements:  An M240 machine gun and blank adaptor with blank ammunition; at least three 
good blank rounds, followed by one expended/dummy round, and three more good rounds.  
Starting configuration for the weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, on FIRE, with the bolt 
forward.  A target/safe direction for the candidate to point the weapon.  The weapon can 
alternatively be mounted on a vehicle or other type of fighting position.  Hearing protection (part 
of the ESB uniform) must be worn when firing.   
Performance steps: 
Note:  Candidate will start in the prone position not touching the weapon. 
1. Clear the weapon: 
(a) Point weapon in a safe direction.  Ensure safety is on FIRE before moving the 
bolt/operating rod assembly. 
(b) Pull and hold cocking handle with right hand palm up to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(c) While holding the cocking handle to the rear, with right hand palm up, with no tension on 
the bolt, place the safety to SAFE. 
(d) Push the cocking handle assembly to the fully forward and locked position. 
(e) Push in feed cover latches, look in a safe direction, raise feed cover, and conduct a four-
point safety check for brass/links/ammunition.  
5. Check feed pawl assembly under cover. 
6. Check feed tray.  Lift feed tray and inspect chamber. 
7. Check between face of bolt and chamber  
8. Check under bolt/operating rod assembly. 
(f) Lower the feed tray. 
2. Load the weapon: 
(a) Place link belt on feed tray with the first round against the cartridge stop with the tips of 
the rounds pointing towards the barrel.  Tilt the weapon to the right and/or hold the 
ammunition belt in place if necessary. 
(b) Close feed cover, ensuring latches lock.  Ensure rounds do not move from cartridge stop 
during closing. 
3. Place the weapon on FIRE and engage your target. 
4. Take immediate action to correct a malfunction: 
Note:  Weapon remains on shoulder while performing immediate action. 
(a) Pull and hold, with palm up, cocking handle with right hand to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(b) Observe ejection port to see if a cartridge case/belt link/round ejects.  If not, place on 
SAFE while holding cocking handle to rear (with no tension on the bolt).  
(c) (Push) Return cocking handle assembly to forward and locked position and proceed to 
clear weapon.  If something ejects, push the cocking handle forward. 
21 
 
21 
(d) Squeeze the trigger and continue mission.  Proceed to clear the weapon if it does not fire. 
5. Unload and clear the weapon: 
(a) Point weapon in a safe direction.  If bolt is forward, ensure safety is on FIRE before 
moving bolt/operating rod assembly. If the bolt is fully locked to the rear, ensure the 
safety is on SAFE and proceed to step e. 
(b) Pull and hold, with palm up, cocking handle with right hand to rear, ensuring bolt locks 
completely to rear. 
(c) While holding the cocking handle to the rear (with no tension on the bolt), place the 
safety to SAFE. 
(d) Return the cocking handle assembly to the fully forward and locked position. 
(e) Push in the feed cover latches, look in a safe direction, raise the feed cover, and conduct a 
four-point safety check (per step 1e above); lower the feed tray and close the feed cover, 
making sure it locks shut. 
(f) Pull and hold, with palm up, the cocking handle assembly with the right hand to the rear. 
(g) While holding the cocking handle to the rear (with no tension on the bolt), place the 
safety to FIRE. 
(h) While depressing trigger, ease bolt forward to close and lock.  Release trigger.  Close 
ejection port cover. 
Table W-4 Part II:  Operate M240B machine gun 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Load the weapon. 
3.  Engage the target. 
4.  Take immediate action. 
5.  Unload and clear the weapon. 
 
 
 
22 
 
22 
W-5 Part I, Identify Hand Grenades 
Task basis:  071-440-0031-Employ hand grenades during an urban operation 
Tasks:  Identify hand grenades 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team that is conducting operations in an urban environment.  
You have been directed to employ hand grenades against a variety of enemy targets. 
Standards:  Correctly identify the name/nomenclature of each hand grenade, within 2 minutes 
and 30 seconds. 
Requirements:  Pictures of grenades or training grenades for identification, labeled with 
numbers.  Candidates write names/nomenclatures, in addition to the number, on a laminated 
answer key that has the purposes listed below each line.  100% accuracy required. 
Performance steps:  Identify the following hand grenades: 
1. M67 Fragmentation: 
(a) Use to disable or kill personnel. 
2. MK3A2 Offensive grenade: 
(a) Use for concussion effect in enclosed areas. 
(b) Use against enemy in bunkers, buildings and fortified areas. 
(c) Use for blasting. 
(d) Use for demolition tasks. 
3. M84 Diversionary/Flash-bang Stun hand grenades: 
(a) Use for disorientation, confusion, and loss of hearing. 
(b) Use as a non-lethal diversionary device. 
(c) Use to damage eyesight and night vision during limited visibility. 
4. M18 Colored smoke: 
(a) Use for screening. 
(b) Use for signaling. 
5. AN-M14 TH3 Incendiary hand grenade: 
(a) Use to destroy equipment. 
(b) Use to start fires. 
6. ABC-M7A2 AND ABC-M7A3 Riot control hand grenades: 
(a) Use to control riots or disable without serious injury. 
W-5:  Identify hand grenades 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  M67 Fragmentation. 
2.  MK3A2 Offensive grenade. 
3.  M84 Diversionary/Flash-bang stun hand grenades. 
4.  M18 Colored smoke. 
5.  AN-M14 TH3 Incendiary hand grenade. 
6.  ABC-M7A2/ABC-M7A3 Riot control hand grenades. 
 
 
 
23 
 
23 
W-5 Part II, Employ Hand Grenades Against Troops in The Open 
Task basis:  071-COM-4407-Employ hand grenades 
Tasks:  Employ hand grenades 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team that has been directed to employ hand grenades 
against troops in the open. You have two M67 fragmentation grenades. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all tasks, in sequence, within 30 seconds. 
Requirements:  Two training grenades with fuses.  Candidate should place both grenades on 
their person, properly secured in their grenade pouches.  If the ESB uniform does not include 
grenade pouches, the station will provide appropriate load bearing equipment to properly secure 
the grenades.  Single enemy silhouette at a range of 35 meters, with a five-meter radius circle 
around it.  Covered position for the candidate. Grader should immediately tell the candidate if 
their grenade exploded within the circle, so the candidate can prepare and throw the second 
grenade within the time limit if required. 
Performance steps: 
Note:  There are five standard positions to throw grenades - standing, prone-to-standing, 
kneeling, prone-to-kneeling, and alternate prone.  However, if you can achieve more distance 
and accuracy using your own personal style, do so as long as your body is facing sideways and 
toward the enemy’s position, and you throw the grenade overhand while maintaining control of 
your weapon. 
1. Select proper throwing position: 
(a) Ensure you have a proper covered position. 
(b) Determine the distance to the target. 
(c) Align your body with the target. 
2. Grip the hand grenade: 
Note:  Do not remove the safety clip or the safety pin until the grenade is about to be thrown. 
(a) Place the hand grenade in the palm of the throwing hand with the safety lever placed 
between the first and second joints of the thumb. 
Note:  For left-handed throwers the grenade is inverted with the top of the fuse facing 
downwards. 
(b) Keep the pull ring away from the palm of the throwing hand so that it can be easily 
removed by the index or middle finger of the free hand. 
3. Prepare the hand grenade. 
(a) Tilt the grenade forward to observe the safety clip. 
(b) Remove the safety clip by sweeping it away from the grenade with the thumb of the 
opposite hand. 
(c) Insert the index or middle finger of the non-throwing hand in the pull ring until it reaches 
the knuckle. 
(d) Ensure that you are holding the safety lever down firmly. 
(e) Twist the pull ring toward the body (away from the body for left-handed throwers) to 
release the pull ring from the confidence clip. 
(f) Remove the safety pin by pulling the pull ring from the grenade. 
4. Throw the hand grenade so it is within the effective range of the target: 
(a) Observe the target to estimate the distance between the throwing position and the target 
area. 
Note:  In observing the target, minimize exposure time to the enemy (no more than 3 seconds). 
Ensure there are no obstacles that can alter or block the flight of the grenade when it is thrown. 
24 
 
24 
(b) Confirm body target alignment. Allow the motion of the throwing arm to continue 
naturally once the grenade is released. 
(c) Seek cover to avoid being hit by fragments or direct enemy fire. 
Note:  If no cover is available, drop to the prone position with your protective head gear facing 
the direction of the grenade’s detonation. 
(d) Prepare second grenade.  Only pull the pin if needed. 
(e) Reengage if grenade did not explode within five meters of the target (Grader guidance). 
Note:  Allow the clock to run on the first throw.  If the first grenade is ineffective, the candidate 
has the remaining time to reengage the target.  Time will stop when the second grenade leaves 
the candidate’s hand. 
Table W-5 Part II:  Employ hand grenades against open troops 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Select proper throwing position. 
2.  Grip the hand grenade. 
3.  Prepare the hand grenade. 
4.  Throw the hand grenade within the effective range of the target. 
 
 
 
25 
 
25 
W-5 Part III, Employ Hand Grenades Through a Window, Door or Bunker 
Task basis:  071-COM-4407-Employ hand grenades, 071-440-0031-Employ hand grenades 
during an urban operation 
Tasks:  Employ hand grenades 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team that has been directed to employ hand grenades 
against troops in a building/room/bunker 10 meters away.  You have two M67 fragmentation 
grenades. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all tasks, in sequence, within 1minute. 
Requirements:  Two training grenades with fuses.  Candidate should place both grenades on 
their person, properly secured in their grenade pouches.  If the ESB uniform does not include 
grenade pouches, the station will provide appropriate load bearing equipment to properly secure 
the grenades.  Building with an open window/door or bunker with overhead cover.  Covered 
position 10 meters away for the candidate to start from.  Both correct and incorrect throwing 
locations should be available for the candidate to select.  Grader should immediately tell the 
candidate if their grenade exploded within the opening, so the candidate can prepare and throw 
the second grenade within the time limit if required. 
Performance steps: 
1. Identify the target to engage. 
2. Select the appropriate movement technique; move to a safe, covered position with protection 
from a roll back grenade and enemy fields of fire. 
3. Select proper throwing position. 
Note:  Depending upon the type of target, type of grenade, and safety requirements for friendly 
forces, any of the following methods may be used: overarm throwing, underarm lobbing, 
throwing like a stone (sidearm delivery and or skipping a stone), flipping, or dropping in place, 
while maintaining control of your weapon. 
4. Determine the distance to the target. 
5. Grip the hand grenade: 
Note:  Do not remove the safety clip or the safety pin until the grenade is about to be thrown. 
(a) Place the hand grenade in the palm of the throwing hand with the safety lever placed 
between the first and second joints of the thumb. 
Note:  For left-handed throwers the grenade is inverted with the top of the fuse facing 
downwards. 
(b) Keep the pull ring away from the palm of the throwing hand so that it can be easily 
removed by the index or middle finger of the free hand. 
6. Prepare the hand grenade: 
(a) Tilt the grenade forward to observe the safety clip. 
(b) Remove the safety clip by sweeping it away from the grenade with the thumb of the 
opposite hand. 
(c) Insert the index or middle finger of the non-throwing hand in the pull ring until it reaches 
the knuckle. 
(d) Ensure that you are holding the safety lever down firmly. 
(e) Twist the pull ring toward the body (away from the body for left-handed throwers) to 
release the pull ring from the confidence clip. 
(f) Remove the safety pin by pulling the pull ring from the grenade. 
7. Throw the hand grenade so it is within the opening of the target: 
26 
 
26 
(a) Observe the target to estimate the distance between the throwing position and the target 
area. 
Note:  In observing the target, minimize exposure time to the enemy (no more than 3 seconds). 
(b) Ensure there are no obstacles that can alter or block the flight of the grenade when it is 
thrown.  
(c) Confirm body target alignment. 
(d) Allow the motion of the throwing arm to continue naturally once the grenade is released. 
(e) Seek cover to avoid being hit by fragments or direct enemy fire. 
Note:  If no cover is available, drop to the prone position with your protective head gear facing 
the target. 
(f) Prepare second grenade. 
(g) Reengage if grenade did not explode within five meters of the target (grader guidance). 
Table W-5 Employ hand grenades through a window, door or bunker 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Identify the target to engage. 
2.  Select the appropriate movement technique. 
3.  Select proper throwing position. 
4.  Select proper throwing position. 
5.  Grip the hand grenade. 
6.  Prepare the hand grenade. 
7.  Throw the hand grenade so it is within the opening of the target. 
 
 
 
27 
 
27 
W-6 M18A1 Claymore Mine (Electronic Initiation) 
Task Basis:071-325-4427-Employ an M18A1 Claymore Mine, 071-325-4426-Recover an 
M18A1 
Task: Employ a Claymore mine.  Recover a Claymore mine. 
Conditions: You are a member of a platoon in a patrol base in a non-CBRNE environment.  You 
have been directed to utilize a Claymore mine to enhance the perimeter defense.  There is a 
known enemy presence. 
Standards: Correctly employ and fire a Claymore mine, in sequence, within 10 minutes.  
Correctly recover an unfired Claymore mine, in sequence, within five minutes. 
A training Claymore mine with all basic items of inventory (BII).  One wooden stake in the 
ground/fixed object at the firing position 16-30 meters from mine emplacement location and 
another at the mine location.  Sandbags, trees, or holes in the ground for candidate to use to test 
the mine.  A ground level target for the candidate to aim at in front of the mine emplacement 
location. 
Performance steps: 
Emplace and fire: 
1. Inventory the components:  M57 firing device, M4 electric blasting cap assembly, M40 test 
set, and M7 bandoleer. 
2. Select a firing position that offers cover and unobstructed observation of site selected for 
emplacing the munition. 
3. Prepare the munition for employment. 
(a) Place bandoleer on shoulder or around neck. 
(b) Ensure firing device is on SAFE and remove dust covers from it and the test set. 
(c) Check the connectors and dust covers of the firing device and test set for foreign material.  
Remove dirt/debris from connectors/dust covers by gently tapping devices against palm 
of hand. 
(d) Plug the test set into the firing device.  Move the firing device bail to the FIRE position. 
(e) Depress handle of firing device with a firm, quick squeeze, and observing flash through 
window of test set.  Candidate states, “I see the light”.  Operator holds window near eye 
and shades with other hand. 
(f) Move firing device bail to SAFE position.  Place firing device with test set attached in 
bandoleer. 
(g) Remove electrical blasting cap assembly from bandoleer.  Remove twist tie from spool. 
(h) Starting at dust cover end of the electrical wire, uncoil approximately one meter of wire. 
(i) Hold the shorting plug/dust cover against the center of the chest with the left hand. 
(j) Encircle firing wire at shorting plug/dust cover base with index finger/thumb of right 
hand. 
(k) While holding right hand to chest, extend left hand to arm’s length, pulling firing wire 
through fingers of right hand.  Lock the elbow and pull all slack from the firing wire. 
(l) Allow shorting plug/dust cover to lay on the ground while tying off the firing wire. 
(m) At one-meter mark, fold firing wire to create a loop large enough to go around a 
stake/fixed object at firing position.  Twist wire loop over index and middle fingers of 
right hand.  Push loop through the circle. 
(n) Secure firing wire from shorting plug/dust cover side of munition to a stake or a fixed 
object at firing position.  Ensure no friendly personnel are near blasting cap during circuit 
test. 
28 
 
28 
(o) Uncoil enough wire to place the spool out of sight.  Place the remaining spool of wire 
(with the blasting cap inside the spool) under a sandbag, behind a tree, or in a hole in the 
ground. 
(p) Remove the firing device with the test set attached from the bandoleer. 
(q) Remove shorting plug/dust cover from connector of firing wire and the end of the test set. 
(r) Plug connector of firing wire into test set and move firing device safety bail to FIRE 
position. 
(s) Depress handle of firing device with a firm, quick squeeze, and observing flash of light 
through window of test set.  Candidate states, “I see the light”.  When squeezing handle, 
an indicator lamp in window of test set flashes.  This flash indicates that blasting cap 
circuitry is satisfactory. 
(t) Place firing device on SAFE.  Disconnect test set from firing wire; replace shorting 
plug/dust covers. 
(u) Disconnect test set from firing device and replace dust covers.  Repack in bandoleer. 
(v) Remove spool/firing wire/blasting cap from barrier used during circuit testing and walk 
tactically while unrolling wire from firing position to site selected for munition.  Lay 
spool (with the blasting cap inside) down within arm’s reach. 
(w) Assume a prone position and remove munition from bandoleer.  Open legs to a 45-degree 
facing front/rear. 
(x) Ensure face of munition marked 'FRONT TOWARD ENEMY' and arrows on top of 
munition point to enemy. 
(y) Push legs into ground with munition facing direction of fire.  In windy areas or when legs 
cannot be pressed into ground, spread them as far as they will go so, they are facing 
front/rear and mine will not tip. 
4. Aim the munition: 
(a) Select an aiming point at ground level in front of the munition. 
(b) Position one eye about six inches to the rear of the sight. 
(c) On knife-edge sight, align two edges of sight with aiming point.  On slit-type peep sight, 
align groove of sight in line with aiming point that is two and a half meters off ground.  
Aiming point should be in center of area of coverage, with bottom edge of peep sight 
parallel to ground that is to be covered with fragment spray. 
(d) Aim the munition by aligning the two edges of the sight with the aiming point. 
5. Arm the munition: 
(a) Remove the blasting cap from the spool’s cavity.  Secure the firing wire approximately 
one meter from the blasting cap side of the munition to a stake, a stone, gravel, a 
sandbag, or another available means. 
(b) Hold the blasting cap against the center of the chest with the left hand. 
(c) Encircle firing wire at base of the blasting cap with the index finger and thumb of the 
right hand. 
(d) While holding right hand to chest, extend left hand to arm’s length, pulling firing wire 
through fingers of right hand.  Lock the elbow and pull all slack from the firing wire. 
(e) Place the blasting cap back into the spool’s cavity until ready to fire. 
(f) At one-meter mark, fold firing wire to create a loop with a large enough circumference to 
go around stake. 
(g) Twist loop over index/middle fingers of right hand.  Push loop through circle created 
during previous step. 
29 
 
29 
(h) Secure the firing wire from the blasting cap side of the munition to a stake or a fixed 
object at the munition emplacement site.  This prevents the munition from being 
misaligned if the firing wire is disturbed. 
(i) Unscrew/invert shipping plug priming adapter nearest stake or anchor.  Remove blasting 
cap from spool. 
(j) Slide slotted end of shipping plug adapter approximately one inch onto firing wire 
between crimped connections and blasting cap.  Pull wire through slotted end of adapter 
until top of blasting cap is firmly seated in bottom portion of shipping plug adapter.  
Screw adapter, with blasting cap, into detonator well. 
(k) Recheck the aim of the munition to ensure that the point of aim has not changed. 
6. Camouflage the munition and firing wire on the way back to the firing position. 
7. Seek cover.  Remove firing device and test set from bandoleer; remove dust covers.  Plug test 
set into firing device. 
8. Remove shorting plug/dust cover from connector of firing wire and from end of test set. 
9. Plug connector of firing wire into test set.  Move firing device safety bail to FIRE position. 
10. Place the eye near the window of the test set and squeeze the handle of the firing device 
quickly to observe the indicator lamp flashing through the window of the test set.  Candidate 
states, “I see the light”. 
11. Move the firing device bail from FIRE position to the SAFE position. 
12. Disconnect test set from firing wire and replace the firing wire and the test set shorting 
plug/dust covers. 
13. Disconnect test set from firing device and replace test set dust covers. Repack test set into 
bandoleer. 
14. Fire the munition: 
(a) Remove shorting plug/dust cover from end of firing wire.  Connect the firing device to 
the firing wire. 
(b) State, “CLAYMORE” twice.  Move firing device safety to FIRE and quickly squeeze 
handle. 
15. Disarm the mine: 
(a) Ensure firing device safety bail is in SAFE position.  Disconnect firing device from the 
firing wire. 
(b) Replace shorting plug on firing wire and dust cover on firing device.  Place firing device 
in bandoleer. 
(c) Remove firing wire from stake or anchor at firing position and place the firing wire 
forward of the position. 
16. Recover the mine: 
(a) Walk tactically to mine, assume a prone position, and check for booby traps and 
tampering. 
(b) Remove shipping plug from detonator well.  Separate shipping plug priming adapter from 
blasting cap. 
(c) Pick up the spool and insert the blasting cap inside it.  Place the spool back on the 
ground. 
(d) Invert the shipping plug priming adapter and screw the plug end of the adapter into the 
detonator well. 
(e) Lift mine from emplacement and secure legs.  Repack mine and all accessories into 
bandoleer. 
30 
 
30 
(f) Remove the firing wire from the stake, anchor, or base of the emplaced munition. 
(g) Pick up the spool.  Wrap the firing wire on the spool as you move back to the firing 
position and secure the shorting plug and dust cover inside the spool.  Ensure all 
components are packed in the bandoleer. 
Table P-7:  M18A1 claymore mine operation (electronic initiation) 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Inventory the components. 
2.  Ensure the firing device is on “SAFE” and remove dust covers. 
3.  Prepare the munition for employment. 
4.  Aim the munition. 
5.  Arm the munition. 
6.  Camouflage the munition and firing wire. 
7.  Seek cover. 
8.  Remove the shorting plug/dust cover. 
9.  Plug connector of firing wire. 
10.  Place the eye near the window of the test set and test the firing device. 
11.  Move the firing device bail from “FIRE” to “SAFE”. 
12.  Disconnect test set from firing wire. 
13.  Disconnect test set from firing device. 
14.  Fire the munition. 
15.  Disarm the mine. 
16.  Recover the mine. 
 
 
 
31 
 
31 
W-7: Javelin 
Based on: 071-060-0004-Prepare a M98-series Javelin for Firing, 071-060-0006-React to 
Javelin that Fails to Fire 
Task: Prepare a M98 Javelin for firing. Perform immediate action procedures for a misfire. 
Condition: You are a gunner who has been directed to engage enemy targets with your Javelin. 
While engaging targets, you experience a misfire. 
Standard: Prepare to fire in three minutes and thirty seconds. Perform immediate action 
procedures for a misfire in two minutes. All tasks will be performed in sequence. 
Station Requirements: A M98 training Javelin with appropriate tools and accessories. A 
covered position for the Candidate to prepare the CLU, a firing position for the Candidate to 
move to, and a target. 
1) Prepare to Fire: 
(a) Candidate will start from a standing position next to the Javelin on the ground behind 
cover. 
(b) Prepare the CLU. Ensure power switch is OFF. Install the CLU battery. Open day sight 
and NVS lens covers on CLU. 
(c) Place the round on the ground with the flat sides of the end caps down and latch assembly 
facing up. 
(d) Kneel on the left side of the round, at the forward end, facing forward. 
(e) Remove forward end cap. Remove locking pin by pulling straight up on wire rope. Turn 
forward end cap latch release counterclockwise. If cap does not come off, press manual 
release button to relieve pressure. Remove forward end cap by lifting Javelin away from 
forward end cap and resting missile on it. 
(f) Remove protective covers from CLU and round interface connectors. Candidate 
verbalizes if not quipped. 
(g) Position protective covers so no interference exists when placing round interface bracket 
in round hooks. 
(h) Engage CLU and round interface connectors by sliding forward, then press down on 
CLU. Round and CLU are connected correctly when latch release snaps into place. Rock 
and gently lift the CLU to ensure it is attached. 
(i) Position open end of round on forward end cap. 
(j) Set power switch to NIGHT. The CLU has four modes of operation: Off, Day, Night (IR 
Surveillance), and test. 
(k) Verify CLU indicators are lit. Candidate verbalizes. Grader states, “CLU indicators are 
flashing”. 
(l) Perform battery warm-up procedures. Turn the power switch to DAY for 30 to 60 
seconds. Grader will state, “30 seconds has elapsed”. Turn the power switch to OFF, then 
back to NIGHT. 
(m) Place on shoulder. Do not lift by handgrips; roll onto shoulder with right arm under 
missile and left hand on grip. Adjust diopter adjust ring for clarity of CLU display. 
Candidate verbalizes. Javelin is prepared to engage. 
(n) Move to firing position and attempt to fire. Squeeze seeker trigger and wait four seconds 
(Candidate will count) for seeker to initialize before locking tracking gates and 
attempting to fire. Candidate visually checks and states, “Back blast area clear”. 
(o) Acquire the target. Candidate verbalizes this step. 
(p) Lock-on the target. Candidate verbalizes this step. 
32 
 
32 
(q) Squeeze the fire trigger. Grader will state “misfire”. 
2) Perform Immediate Action for a misfire: 
(a) Candidate will start from the last position in the previous task. 
(b) Release seeker and fire triggers and attempt to engage again per step 13 above. Grader 
will state, “Misfire”. 
(c) Set Javelin on ground, pointed in direction of enemy, with the CLU handgrips facing up. 
Keep back blast area clear. 
(d) Turn OFF the CLU, pausing in the DAY mode for one second to ensure flipper mirrors 
reset properly. 
(e) Press the latch release and disconnect the CLU from the round. Check for dirt and debris. 
(f) Reconnect the CLU to the same round. Rock and gently lift the CLU to ensure it is 
attached. 
(g) Turn ON the CLU. It can take up to four minutes for the DDC/NVS to cool to operating 
temperature. 
(h) Verify CLU indicators are lit and the NVS Not Cool Indicator is off. Candidate 
verbalizes this step. 
(i) Adjust diopter adjust ring per step 12 above. 
(j) Attempt to reengage the target per step 13 above. Grader will state, “Misfire”. 
(k) Place the Javelin on the ground, pointing toward the enemy. 
(l) Turn OFF CLU, pausing in the DAY mode for one second to ensure flipper mirrors reset 
properly. 
(m) Disconnect the CLU from the round. Stay clear of the forward and aft ends of the round 
at all times. 
(n) Move round 25 meters from the firing position and get a replacement. Candidate 
verbalizes this step. 
Table: W-7: Javelin 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
Prepare to Fire Javelin 
Perform Immediate Action for a misfire; Javelin 
 
 
 
33 
 
33 
W-8: M-2 Machine Gun 
Task basis:  071-022-0001-Maintain a caliber .50 M2 series machine gun, 071-022-0003-Load a 
caliber .50 M2 series machine gun, 071-022-0005-Correct malfunctions of a caliber .50 M2 
series machine gun, 071-022-0004-Unload a caliber .50 M2 series machine gun 
Tasks:  Clear, load, fire until a stoppage occurs, perform immediate action, expend remaining 
ammunition, unload, and clear an M2 Machine Gun. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting combat operations.  You have a stoppage 
while engaging targets with your machine gun. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all steps, in sequence, within one minute. 
Requirements:  An assembled M2 Caliber .50 machine gun, with headspace and timing set, set 
up for firing blanks.  Ensure the correct front cartridge stop is installed.  Starting configuration 
for the weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, on FIRE/full auto, with the bolt forward.  Weapon 
may be mounted on a tripod, vehicle, or other fighting position, but must be well emplaced and 
secure.  A five round (minimum) belt of blank ammunition, with one dummy round in the 
middle.  Safe direction for the candidate to engage.  Hearing protection (part of the ESB 
uniform) must be worn when firing. 
Performance steps: 
Note:  Candidate will start in the seated (if on tripod) or standing (if vehicle-mounted) position 
not touching the weapon. 
1. Clear the weapon: 
(a) Place the trigger block on SAFE and unlock the bolt latch release. 
(b) Raise the cover and lift the cartridge extractor. 
(c) Remove the ammunition belt from the feed way. 
(d) Place cartridge extractor down and close the cover. 
(e) Pull and lock the bolt to the rear, leaving the retracting slide handle to the rear. 
(f) Open the cover and inspect the chamber and T-slot for rounds. 
(g) Press the bolt latch release and ease the bolt forward with retracting slide handle.  Close 
the cover. 
2. Load the weapon: 
(a) Ensure the bolt is forward and bolt latch release is locked. 
(b) Insert double-loop end of ammunition belt into feed way until first round is engaged by 
belt-holding pawl. 
(c) Pull the retracting slide handle rearward, retracting the bolt all the way to the rear. 
(d) Release handle.  The machine gun is now half-loaded.  A round is not in the chamber. 
(e) Pull the retracting slide handle to the rear for a second time to fully load the gun. 
(f) Release handle.  A round is now in the chamber and the machine gun is ready to fire. 
(g) Place the trigger block on FIRE and engage your target. 
3. Take immediate action to correct a malfunction for a cool weapon (has fired less than 200 
rounds in two minutes): 
4. Engage the Target 
(a) Hold the weapon on target. 
(b) Wait 10 seconds in case the weapon has a hang fire.  (Candidate verbalizes this step). 
(c) Pull the retracting handle to the rear. 
(d) Observe that round or case ejects.  If yes, continue to next step; if not, proceed to unload 
weapon below. 
(e) Return the retracting slide handle to its forward position. 
34 
 
34 
(f) If the bolt locks to the rear, depress the bolt latch to return the bolt to the forward 
position. 
(g) Attempt to reengage the target; expend remaining ammunition. 
5. Unload and clear the weapon, removing all rounds and links: 
(a) Place trigger block on SAFE and unlock the bolt latch release. 
(b) Raise the cover and lift the cartridge extractor. 
(c) Remove the ammunition belt from the feed way. 
(d) Place cartridge extractor down and close the cover. 
(e) Pull and lock the bolt to the rear, leaving the retracting slide handle to the rear. 
(f) Open the cover and inspect the chamber and T-slot for rounds. 
(g) Press the bolt latch release and ease the bolt forward with retracting slide handle.  Close 
the cover. 
Table W-4:  Operate M-2 machine gun 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Load the weapon. 
3.  Take immediate action. 
4.  Engage the target. 
5.  Unload and clear an unfired round. 
 
 
 
35 
 
35 
W-9: MK-19 Heavy Grenade Launcher 
Task basis: 071-030-0001-Maintain an MK19 grenade machine gun, 071-030-0005-Load an 
MK 19 machine gun, 071-030-0008-Correct malfunctions of an MK19 grenade machine gun, 
071-030-0006-Unload an MK 19 grenade machine gun, 331-18B-2421-Engage targets with the 
MK47 Advanced lightweight grenade launcher TM 9-1010-230-10 
Tasks:  Clear, load, fire until a stoppage occurs, perform immediate action, expend remaining 
ammunition, unload, and clear a MK 19 machine gun. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting combat operations.  You have a stoppage 
while engaging targets with your machine gun. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all steps in sequence within one minute. 
Requirements:  An assembled MK 19 grenade machine gun, prepared for firing.  Starting 
configuration for the weapon will be:  Free of ammunition, on FIRE, with the bolt forward.  
Weapon may be mounted on a tripod, vehicle, or other fighting position.  A belt of dummy 
ammunition and a cleaning rod or other tool for removal of spent round from the bolt face.  
Target for the candidate to engage.  A MK 47 grenade launcher or other variant may be used 
based on the unit’s inventory; use the standards outlined in that weapon’s TM for clear, load, 
perform immediate action, unload, and clear. 
Performance steps: 
Note:  Candidate will start in the seated (if on tripod) or standing (if vehicle-mounted) position 
not touching the weapon. 
1. Clear the weapon: 
(a) Place the safety switch to SAFE and remove the case catch bag, if applicable. 
(b) Charge the weapon.  Pull both charger handles to the rear ensuring the bolt locks to the 
rear.  Return both charger handles to the forward position and rotate only one charger 
handle up. 
(c) Open the top cover assembly and check for rounds on the bolt, on/below feed tray, and 
feeder pawls. 
(d) Return the bolt to the forward position.  Place the safety switch on FIRE.  Hold one 
charger handle to the rear.  Ride the bolt forward by squeezing the trigger and easing the 
bolt forward.  Ensure both charger handles are forward and in up position and place the 
safety switch on SAFE. 
2. Load the weapon: 
(a) Attach feed throat to feeder. Squeeze spring-loaded pins on feed throat; insert into slots 
on sides of feeder. 
(b) Insert round through feed throat (female first) into feeder. Push across first set of feeder 
pawls, ensuring it is straight and firmly seated against bolt. Push secondary drive lever to 
right and close to cover assembly. 
(c) Load the first round to the fully loaded position. Pull both charger handles to the rear 
ensuring the bolt locks to the rear. Return both charger handles to the forward and up 
position.  Place safety switch in FIRE position. Squeeze the trigger allowing the bolt to 
slam forward.  Pull both charging handles to rear. Return both charger handles to the 
forward and up position. 
3. Attempt to fire the weapon until a stoppage occurs. 
4. Take immediate action: 
(a) Hold weapon on target and pull the bolt to the rear.  Observe or attempt to catch live 
round as it ejects. 
36 
 
36 
(b) Push both charger handles forward to up position.  Attempt to reengage target; expend 
remaining ammunition. 
5. Unload and clear the weapon: 
(a) Place the safety switch to SAFE and remove the case catch bag, if applicable. 
(b) Charge the weapon.  Pull both charger handles to the rear ensuring the bolt locks to the 
rear.  Return both charger handles to the forward position and rotate only one charger 
handle up. 
(c) Remove live round or spent case from the bolt, if present.  Insert the tip of a cleaning rod 
or tool through the receiver rail, as close to the bolt face as possible, with tip of rod or 
tool on top of round or case.  Position one hand beneath the weapon to catch the round as 
it falls out.  Force round off the bolt face and out the bottom of the gun by pushing down 
on the cleaning rod or tool.  Attempt to catch round as it falls out. 
(d) Open top cover assembly.  Remove linked rounds from feeder.  Reach beneath feed tray 
with one hand.  Press and hold primary and secondary positioning pawls.  Slide linked 
rounds out of feeder and feed throat. 
(e) Return the bolt to the forward position.  Place the weapon on FIRE.  Hold one charger 
handle to the rear.  Ride the bolt forward by squeezing the trigger and easing the bolt 
forward.  Ensure both charger handles are forward and up position.  Place the weapon on 
SAFE. 
W-9 Operate heavy grenade launcher 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon 
2.  Load the weapon 
3.  Attempt to fire weapon until stoppage occurs 
4.  Take immediate action 
5.  Unload and clear an unfired round 
 
 
 
37 
 
37 
W-10: Anti-Tank Weapons (Carl Gustaf 84-Mm Recoilless Rifle) 
Based on: 331-18B-2103-Engage Targets with the Carl Gustaf 84-mm Recoilless Rifle, 071-
318-2255-Perform Misfire Procedures on an 84-MM Recoilless M3 Rifle 
Task: Prepare a Carl Gustaf for firing. Perform immediate action procedures for a misfire 
unload. 
Condition: You are a member of a team who has been directed to engage enemy targets (Grader 
states distance) with your Carl Gustaf. While engaging targets, you experience a misfire. 
Standard: Prepare and fire in one minute. Perform misfire procedures and unload in one minute. 
All tasks will be performed in sequence. 
Station Requirements: A Carl Gustaf and training round with appropriate tools and accessories, 
in the appropriate starting configuration. Gunner for the Carl Gustaf (can be the Grader). 
Performance Measures: 
1) Prepare and Fire: 
(a) Candidate/Assistant Gunner (AG) will start from a standing position with the weapon 
held by the Grader/Gunner. 
Load the weapon. 
(a) Gunner assume firing position and push cocking handle forward with right thumb, 
returning hand to firing grip with index finger on trigger guard. Put on "S" and state, 
“Target description, load one round type". 
(b) AG repeat Gunner’s order.  
(c) Open breech by pushing venturi lock knob forward with right hand and rotating venturi 
with left hand on venturi lever. 
(d) Visually examine breech and barrel for dirt or unburnt propellant. 
(e) Pick up round, nose forward, with right hand, using underhand grip; remove protective 
cover and grasp rim of round with left hand, placing a finger in recess in rim of round. 
(f) Insert round into chamber, ensuring the recess is in line with cartridge guide. 
(g) Close breech with left hand and tap venturi lock knob to rear to ensure lock is closed.  
(h) With right hand hold pressure on venturi lever until ready to fire.  
(i) Check back blast area (BBA) for personnel and loose debris and state, "BBA clear". 
(j) Gunner acquire target based on weapon’s optics/sights. Gunner state target identification. 
Fire the weapon. 
(a) AG repeat target identification and maintain pressure on venturi lever. Gunner state, “On 
the way”. 
(b) AG check BBA, report, “BBA clear”, release venturi lever, leave hand in place above 
lever, and watch BBA.  
(c) Gunner place on "F.", aim, apply slight pressure on trigger, aim, and fire weapon. 
(d)  Grader will state, “Misfire”.  
(e) AG repeat “Misfire” three times and return pressure to venturi lever with right hand. 
2) Perform Misfire Procedure and Unload: 
Candidate will start from the last position in the previous task. 
Misfire procedures. 
(a) Keep aim; wait five seconds. 
(b) Candidate verbalizes. Gunner recharge, re-aim, and state, “On the way”.  
(c) AG check BBA and verbalize “BBA clear”, release venturi lever, leave hand in place 
above lever, and watch BBA. 
(d) Gunner pull trigger. 
38 
 
38 
(e) Grader will state, “Misfire”. AG repeat “Misfire” three times and return pressure to 
venturi lever with right hand. 
(f) Gunner keep aim, recharge, and direct AG to check venturi lock. 
(g) AG check handle is in lock position and round is fully seated, then state, “Venturi lock 
checked”. 
(h) Gunner re-aim and state, "On the way". 
(i) AG check BBA, state “BBA clear”, release venturi lever, leave hand in place above lever, 
and watch BBA. 
(j) Gunner pull trigger. 
(k) Grader will state, “Misfire”. AG repeat “Misfire” three times and return pressure to 
venturi lever with right hand. 
(l) Gunner keep aim, place on “S”, and recharge. Maintain firing position and wait two 
minutes (Candidate verbalizes). 
(m) Gunner direct AG to load a new round, re-aim, and state, "On the way". 
(n) AG check BBA, state, “BBA clear”, release venturi lever, leave hand in place above 
lever, and watch BBA. 
(o) Gunner pull trigger. 
(p) Grader will state, “Misfire”. 
(q) Gunner keep aim. 
(r) AG repeat “Misfire” three times and return pressure to venturi lever with right hand. 
3. Unload the weapon. 
(a) Gunner place on "S"; with trigger hand on firing grip, place index finger on trigger guard. 
State, "Unload”. 
(b) AG repeat, "Unload”. Open breech and tap venturi lock knob forward to partially eject 
round. Grasp round e from chamber; catch with underhand grip of right hand. 
(c) Close breech with left hand and tap venturi lock knob to rear. Report, "Clear”. 
Table. W-10: Anti-Tank Weapons (Carl Gustaf 84-Mm Recoilless Rifle) 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1. Prepare and Fire, Carl Gustaf 84-mm Recoilless Rifle: 
2. Perform Misfire Procedure and Unload: Carl Gustaf 84-mm Recoilless Rifle: 
3. Unload the weapon, Carl Gustaf 84-mm Recoilless Rifle 
 
 
 
39 
 
39 
ESB-1: Arctic Skills, Employ an Ahkio Sled 
Task: Employ and Ahkio Sled 
Conditions: In a field environment, given an Ahkio with unit prescribed sustainment equipment, 
four traces, and four harnesses while wearing ECWCS appropriate to weather conditions, 
ballistic helmet, fighting load carrier, and weapon. 
Standards: Within ten (10) minutes, the Soldier Packed unit prescribed sustainment equipment 
into the Ahkio so balance is maintained and all items are contained in the Ahkio, secured, and 
covered.  
Performance Measures: 
(1) Pack Ahkio Sled 
(a) Place tent pins in bottom center of Ahkio with the heads opposite each other. Place 
hammers on floor of sled on either end of the tent pins, heads opposite one another. 
(b) Place bow saw on top of tent pins. 
(c) Place stove board on top of bow saw. 
(d) Place fire extinguisher, center pole, axe, two MSR fuel bottles, and machetes on either 
side of the stove board, along the sides of the sled, ensuring that the weight is distributed 
evenly. 
(e) To the rear of the stove board, place fuel can and water can. Fuel can opening is up and to 
the rear and is double bagged with HAZMAT pads for transport. Water can opening is 
down and towards the front of the Ahkio. 
(f) Lantern (in case) is placed in front of stove board, perpendicular to the long axis of the 
sled. Two cook sets are placed in front of the lantern. 
(g) Place repair kit (ammo can) in front of the lantern. Place squad stoves on either side of 
the sled next to the cook sets. 
(h) Place the pole board in front of the repair kit. Place the 120-foot rope, traces, and 
harnesses on top of the pole board. 
(i) Place SHA on top of and slightly to the rear of the stove board. 
(j) Place the tent with shovels (so that the apex is toward the front of the sled) on the SHA). 
(k) Fold two canvas ends of Ahkio sled over sled contents. Fold sides of canvas over sled 
contents. 
(l) Place the tripod and door poles on top of canvas (field expedient poles only). The 
manufactured tripod and collapsible door poles should be secured inside the sled with the 
center pole. Secure the contents of sled with lashing rope from rear to front. 
Table. ESB-1: ARCTIC SKILLS, Employ and Ahkio Sled 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
Pack Ahkio Sled 
 
 
 
40 
 
40 
ESB-2: Arctic Skills; Employ Individual Camouflage in A Snow-Covered Environment 
Task: Employ Individual Camouflage in a Snow-Covered Environment 
Conditions: In any snow-covered field environment above or below the tree line while wearing 
Extended Cold Weather Clothing System appropriate to conditions, fighting load carrier, ballistic 
helmet, weapon, and rucksack. Given a set of over whites (trousers, parka, mitten covers, helmet 
cover, and rucksack cover) and tape if available. 
Standard: Within five (5) minutes the Soldier selects and dons the camouflage outerwear 
appropriate for the terrain. Camouflage equipment and weapon without affecting the function. 
Change camouflage scheme as the conditions change. 
Performance Measures: 
(1) Select Over-white combination 
(a) Soldier selected appropriate over white combination for given terrain. 
(2) Describe Camouflage as necessary 
(a) Approximately waist high vegetation. Soldier incorporates over-white Kevlar cover, top, 
and gloves. 
(b) Used for trails or road systems, Soldier wears over-white bottoms, with standard top and 
helmet cover 
(c) For open fields or above tree line, Soldier wears over-white Kevlar Cover, top, bottoms, 
and gloves. 
Table. ESB-2 Arctic Skills; Employ Individual Camouflage in A Snow-Covered Environment 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
Soldier selected appropriate over white combination for given terrain. 
Soldier explained camouflage scheme as necessary. 
 
MEDICAL LANE 
 
 
41 
 
41 
M-1: Request Medical Evacuation 
Task basis:  081-COM-0101-Request medical evacuation (MEDEVAC). 
Tasks:  Request MEDEVAC. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team who has been directed to request MEDEVAC for a 
wounded teammate.  You are in a wartime, non-CBRNE environment. 
NOTE:  Give the candidate the security of the pickup site and any additional guidance. 
Standards:  Prepare to send the MEDEVAC within three minutes.  Transmit lines 1-5 within 25 
seconds of initial contact with evacuation unit.  Transmit lines 6-9 within one additional minute.  
All tasks will be performed in sequence, using the proper brevity codes and radiotelephone 
pronunciation and procedures with 100% accuracy. 
Requirements:  A protractor and military map with candidate location clearly plotted.  One set 
of signal operating instructions (SOI) according to unit SOP, with all pertinent frequencies listed.  
All call signs and suffixes required.  Two operational radios, powered on, with both the 
MEDEVAC and operational frequencies programmed.  It will be set to the operational 
frequency, so the candidate is forced to make the changes based on the SOI.  Two Department of 
Defense (DD) Form 1380 tactical combat casualty care (TCCC) cards properly filled out for the 
simulated casualties; the casualties should be of different type and precedence.  The candidate is 
required to derive the applicable information from the cards, not have the information given to 
them.  At least three appropriate signaling devices, such as VS-17 panel, colored smoke 
grenades, strobe lights, etc., to be used as the method of marking the pickup site.  The candidate 
must select a device to use, not have the information given to them.  Candidate must derive the 
appropriate special equipment based on the test site, casualties, and additional situation guidance 
from the grader.  Laminated paper with nine blank lines, alcohol pens, and eraser.  While all the 
information will be available in the holding area, during testing the candidate must not be given 
any graphic training aids (GTAs), cheat sheets, brevity codes, etc.  At the test site, the candidate 
must not be able to see any of the information/equipment until time has started. 
Performance steps: 
1. Prepare the MEDEVAC request: 
(a) Determine grid coordinates for pickup, providing complete six-digit grid with identifier, 
accurate within 200 meters. 
(b) Determine operational radio frequency, call sign, and suffix.  Candidate uses SOI to 
determine necessary information.  Candidate makes appropriate changes to radio and 
prepares for transmission on MEDEVAC frequency. 
(c) Determine number of patients and precedence.  Candidate uses TCCC cards to determine 
necessary information. 
(d) Determine special equipment required based on the site location, patient injuries, and 
additional guidance. 
(e) Determine number and type of patients.  Candidate uses TCCC cards to determine the 
necessary information. 
(f) Determine security of pickup site.  Give this information to the candidate during the 
Condition brief. 
(g) Determine method of marking the pickup site.  Candidate must choose based on the 
choices given. 
(h) Determine patient nationality and status.  Candidate uses TCCC cards to determine the 
necessary information.  The number of patients in each category need not be transmitted. 
42 
 
42 
(i) Determine terrain description based on site location/map/additional guidance.  While 
only required in peacetime, it can be given.  It is used when not in a CBRNE 
environment. 
2. Transmit lines 1-5: 
(a) Candidate states, “I have a MEDEVAC request”.  Grader provides a response within 
three seconds. 
(b) Line 1:  Six-digit grid, including grid zone identifier. 
(c) Line 2:  Operational frequency, call sign, and suffix.  Candidate will use this frequency 
later to transmit lines 6-9. 
(d) Line 3:  A+#-Urgent, B+#-Urgent-Surgical, C+#-Priority, D+#-Routine, E+#-
Convenience.  States, “Break” between categories. 
(e) Line 4:  A-None, B-Hoist, C-Extrication Equipment, D-Ventilator. 
(f) Line 5:  L+#-Litter, A+#-Ambulatory.  State, “Break” between categories.  End 
transmission by stating, “Over” 
3. Transmit lines 6-9: 
(a) Candidate switches radio to operational frequency and regains contact with evacuation 
platform for transmission of remaining lines.  Grader initiates contact, requesting 
remaining lines when candidate switches radio frequency. 
(b) Line 6:  N-No enemy in area, P-Possibly enemy in area, E-Enemy in area, X-Enemy in 
area (armed escort required). 
(c) Line 7:  A-Panels, B-Pyrotechnic signal, C-Smoke, D-None, E-Other. 
(d) Line 8:  A-U.S. military, B-U.S. citizen, C-Non-U.S. military, D-Non-U.S. citizen, E-
Enemy prisoner of war. 
(e) Line 9:  Provide description of pertinent terrain information.  End transmission by stating, 
“Over”. 
Table. M1:  Request medical evacuation 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Prepare the MEDEVAC request  
2.  Transmit lines 1-5 
3.  Transmit lines 6-9 
 
 
 
43 
 
43 
M-2: Provide Care Under Fire and Move A Casualty 
Task basis: 081-COM-1001-Evaluate a Casualty, 081-000-0048-Apply a Combat Application 
Tourniquet (CAT), 081-COM-1046-Movement of a Casualty, 081-000-0013-Initiate a Tactical 
Combat Casualty Care Card 
Tasks:  Perform care under fire.  Transport and transfer a casualty. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team on a combat patrol that has come under sporadic small 
arms fire.  You witness a teammate in the open receive a gunshot wound to the (Grader will state 
left or right) leg. Your teammate is struggling to reach his/her CAT and you see bright red 
arterial bleeding.  No spinal injury is suspected and you are not in a CBRNE environment. 
Standards: Perform care under fire, in sequence, within three minutes.  Transport and transfer, in 
sequence, within nine minutes. You must not cause further injury, have no safety violations, and 
not lose any equipment. 
Requirements: A simulated casualty; either an actual Soldier or mannequin (with all 
extremities) weighing 160-200 pounds with a clearly visible simulated extremity wound.  The 
casualty will be in a full combat uniform per unit SOP, including weapon, a fully packed 
improved first aid kit (IFAK), and CAT. The casualty’s TCCC card will have the administrative 
data already filled out.  Casualty should be positioned on the ground, 10 meters away from a 
covered position, where the candidate will apply aid.  An additional covered position 50 meters 
away where the candidate will fill out the TCCC Card.  A functional Sked litter packaged per 
unit SOP.  Candidate will start the task in full ESB uniform, carrying the Sked litter, with a 
magazine of blank rounds loaded.  Grader may provide verbal cues as to the enemy rate of fire, 
use a pneumatic gun, or have Opposing Force (OPFOR) Soldiers returning fire with blanks.  
Provide the candidate with, or ensure the candidate has a watch with the correct date and time.  
Candidate will start from an open position 10 meters away from the first covered position.  
Hearing protection (part of the ESB uniform) must be worn when firing. 
Performance steps: 
1. Suppress enemy fire: 
(a) Return fire and take cover until fire suppression is achieved. 
Note:  Time starts when fire suppression has been achieved. (Grader states). 
(b) Candidate will return fire, move to cover, and yell direction, distance, and description. 
(c) Direct the casualty to return fire, move to cover, and administer self-aid to stop the 
bleeding.  When the candidate has demonstrated the proper techniques, the grader will 
state “Fire suppression has been achieved”, or the enemy fire will stop. 
(d) Candidate states, “Cover me”.  Grader will reply, “Got you covered”. 
2. Move the casualty, his/her weapon, and mission-essential equipment to cover using the 
Cradle-drop drag (below), or any appropriate technique, without causing further injuries or 
losing any equipment: 
(e) With the casualty lying on his/her back, kneel at the head. 
(f) Slide your hands, palms up, under the casualty's shoulders getting a firm hold under 
his/her armpits. 
(g) Partially rise, supporting the casualty's head on one of your forearms.  You may bring 
your elbows together and let the casualty’s head rest on both of your forearms. 
(h) With casualty in a semi-sitting position, rise and drag backwards to the nearest covered 
position. 
3. Administer life-saving bleeding control by applying the CAT to the wounded extremity: 
(a) Expose the wound and remove the CAT from the casualty’s IFAK. 
44 
 
44 
(b) Place CAT, 2-3 inches above the wound on the injured extremity. 
(c) Pull the free end of the self-adhering band through the buckle and route through the 
friction adapter buckle. 
(d) Pull the self-adhering band tight around the extremity and fasten it back on itself as 
tightly as possible. 
(e) Twist the windlass until the bleeding stops.  Candidate will verbalize this and will ensure 
to not overtighten if using an actual Soldier as a casualty. 
(f) Lock the windlass in place within the windlass clip. 
(g) Secure the windlass with the windlass strap. 
(h) Assess for absence of a distal pulse.  Candidate should perform and verbalize with proper 
technique.  Pulse must be taken with skin-to-skin contact and not using their thumb. 
(i) Place a "T" and the time of the application on the casualty with a marker (provided in 
casualty’s IFAK).  This can be simulated and verbalized, or a piece of lamination can be 
applied to the casualty’s forehead so each candidate can perform the task. 
(j) Transport and transfer a Casualty: 
4. Move the casualty using a Sked litter. 
(a) Prepare the Sked litter for transport. 
1) Remove the Sked litter from its pack and place it on the ground, unfasten the retainer 
strap. 
2) Step on foot end of Sked litter and unroll completely, bending the Sked in half and 
back roll. 
3) Repeat with the opposite end of the litter so that the Sked litter lays flat. 
4) Pull out the handholds, straps for the casualty, and dragline at the head of the litter. 
5) Place and secure a casualty to a Sked litter. 
6) Place the Sked litter next to the casualty so that the head end of the litter is next to the 
casualty's head and place the cross straps under the Sked litter. 
7) Log roll casualty onto his/her non-CAT side in a steady and even manner. 
8) Slide the Sked litter as far under the casualty as possible. 
9) Gently roll the casualty until he/she is again lying on his/her back with the litter 
beneath him/her. 
10) Slide casualty to middle of the Sked litter, keeping his/her spinal column as straight 
as possible. 
11) Pull out the straps from under the Sked litter and bring the straps across the casualty. 
12) Lift sides of Sked litter and fasten the four cross straps to the buckles directly 
opposite the straps. 
13) Lift the foot portion of the Sked litter feeding the foot straps over the casualty's lower 
extremities and through the unused grommets at the foot end of the Sked litter. 
14) Fasten the straps to the buckles and check to make sure the casualty is secured to the 
Sked litter. 
15) Reassess CAT. 
(b) Suppress the enemy. 
1) Candidate will return fire.  When the candidate has demonstrated the proper 
techniques, the Grader will state “Fire superiority has been achieved”, or the enemy 
fire will stop. 
2) Candidate states, “Cover me”.  Grader will reply, “Got you covered”. 
3) Drag the casualty 50 meters to the casualty collection point (CCP) and reassess CAT. 
45 
 
45 
5. Document injuries and treatment given on casualty's TCCC Card (in IFAK) for transfer to 
medical personnel. 
(a) Remove TCCC Card.  Administrative data will already be filled out. 
(b) Complete all pertinent entries as fully as possible. 
(c) Front of card: 
1) Evacuation (EVAC): - Mark an “X” on the casualty’s evacuation priority/precedence 
(Urgent; Priority; or Routine). 
2) Date:  Write date of injury in DD-MMM-YY format.  For example, “29-JUN-13”. 
3) Time:  Write 24-hour time of injury, and indicate whether local (L) or Zulu (Z) time.  
For example, “1300Z”. 
4) Mechanism of Injury:  Mark “X” on mechanism or cause of injury (artillery, blunt, 
burn, fall, grenade, gunshot wound (GSW), IED, landmine, motor vehicle 
crash/collision (MVC), rocket propelled grenade (RPG), other (specify)).  Mark all 
that apply. 
5) Injury:  Mark an “X” at the site of the injury/injuries on the body picture. 
6) TQ:  R Leg (tourniquet, right leg) - If a tourniquet is applied to the right leg, write 
type of tourniquet used and the time of tourniquet application. 
7) TQ:  L Leg (tourniquet, left leg) - If a tourniquet is applied to the left leg, write type 
of tourniquet used and the time of tourniquet application. 
(d) Back of card: 
1) Evacuation (EVAC):  Mark “X” on casualty’s priority/precedence (Urgent; Priority; 
Routine). 
2) C:  Mark an “X” for all Circulation hemorrhage control interventions.  For 
tourniquets (TQ), mark category (Extremity, Junctional and/or Truncal) and write 
name of TQ(s) used. 
3) First Responder Name:  Print the first responder’s name (Last, First). 
4) First Responder Last 4:  Write last four numbers of first responder’s Social Security 
number. 
5) Attach completed card to casualty per unit SOP.  Do not attach the card to casualty's 
body armor as this equipment may will be separated from the casualty once they 
arrive at the medical treatment facility (MTF). 
Table. M-2: Provide care under fire and move a casualty 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Suppress enemy fire. 
2.  Move the casualty and his/her equipment to cover. 
3.  Administer life-saving aid. 
4.  Move the casualty using a Sked Litter. 
5. Document injuries and treatment given and transfer to medical personnel. 
 
 
 
46 
 
46 
M-3:  Perform First Aid to Restore Breathing And/or Pulse 
Task Basis: 081-831-1023-Perform First Aid to Restore Breathing and/or Pulse, 081-833-0142-
Insert a Nasopharyngeal Airway  
Tasks:  Perform first aid to restore breathing and/or pulse of an unconscious adult. 
Conditions: You see an adult who appears to be choking collapse to the ground.  You are on a 
Forward Operating Base, not in a CBRNE environment, and no spinal injury is suspected.  You 
have a Basic Life Support (BLS) bag. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all tasks to standard, in sequence, within seven minutes, without 
causing further injury. 
Requirements:  Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) mannequin is preferred so the grader can 
adequately judge the depth and rate of compressions, as well as the quality of breaths given.  If a 
non-CPR mannequin is used, it should be fully functional with all extremities for maximum 
training value.  The mannequin and candidate will start in the standard field uniform.  A BLS 
bag with at least two different sizes of Nasopharyngeal Airways (NPAs), and CPR accessories, 
such as face shields.  The mannequin will be on a hard, flat surface. 
Performance steps: 
1. Approach the casualty and check for responsiveness. 
The grader will state, “Casualty is unresponsive.” 
(a) Direct a specific bystander to call for medical personnel. 
(b) Direct another specific bystander to retrieve an Automated External Defibrillator (AED). 
2. Roll the casualty onto his/her back: 
(a) Kneel beside the casualty. 
(b) Raise the near arm and straighten it out above the head. 
(c) Adjust the legs, so they are together and straight or nearly straight. 
(d) Place one hand on the back of the casualty's head and neck. 
(e) Grasp the casualty under the arm with the free hand. 
(f) Pull steadily and evenly toward yourself, keeping the head and neck in line with the 
torso.  Roll the casualty as a single unit. 
(g) Place the casualty's arms at his/her sides. 
The grader will state, “Casualty does not appear to be breathing.” 
3. Open the airway using the head-tilt/chin-lift method: 
(a) Expose casualty’s bare chest. 
(b) Kneel at the level of the casualty's shoulders. 
(c) Place one hand on casualty's forehead and apply firm, backward pressure with palm to tilt 
head back. 
(d) Place fingertips of other hand under bony part of lower jaw and lift, bringing chin 
forward.  Do not use thumb to lift.  Do not completely close casualty’s mouth.  Do not 
press deeply into soft tissue under chin. 
4. Check for breathing: 
(a) While maintaining the open airway position, place an ear over the casualty's mouth and 
nose, looking toward the chest and stomach. 
(b) Look for the chest to rise and fall. 
(c) Listen for air escaping during exhalation. 
(d) Feel for the flow of air on the side of your face. 
(e) Count the number of respirations for 15 seconds. 
The grader will state, “Casualty is not breathing” 
47 
 
47 
5. Insert an NPA: 
(a) Keep the casualty in a face-up position. 
(b) Select the appropriate size of airway by measuring from the patient's nostril to the earlobe 
or from the patient's nostril to the angle of the jaw. 
(c) Lubricate the tube of the NPA: 
(d) Push the tip of the casualty's nose upward gently. 
(e) Position tube of the NPA so that the bevel (pointed end) of the NPA faces toward the 
septum (the partition inside the nose that separates the nostrils).  Most NPAs are designed 
to be placed in the right nostril. 
(f) Insert NPA into the nostril and advance it until the flange rests against the nostril.  Never 
force the airway into the patient's nostril.  If resistance is met, pull the tube out and 
attempt to insert it in the other nostril. 
(g) Recheck breathing per step 4. 
Grader will state, “Casualty is still not breathing” 
6. Give breaths to ensure an open airway: 
(a) Insert a face shield, if available, into the casualty's mouth, with the short airway portion 
over the top of the tongue, and flatten the plastic sheet around the mouth. 
(b) Maintain airway and gently pinch nose closed (covering the NPA), using the hand on the 
casualty's forehead. 
(c) Take a normal breath and place your mouth, in an airtight seal, around the casualty's 
mouth. 
(d) Give two breaths (1 second each), taking a breath between them, while watching for the 
chest to rise and fall and listening and/or feeling for air to escape during exhalation.  
Breaths should not be over-exaggerated or forceful. 
Grader will state, “The chest did not rise” 
(e) Reposition the casualty's head slightly farther backward and repeat the breaths. 
Grader will state, “The chest did not rise” 
7. Perform chest compressions to clear the airway: 
(a) Kneel close to the side of the casualty's body. 
(b) Locate the nipple line placing the heel of one hand on the lower half of the sternum 
(breastbone).  
(c) Place the heel of the other hand on top of the first hand on the lower half of the 
breastbone, extending or interlacing the fingers. 
(d) Straighten and lock the elbows with the shoulders directly above the hands. 
(e) Without bending the elbows, rocking, or allowing the shoulders to sag, apply enough 
pressure to depress the breastbone 1½ to 2 inches.  Give compressions at a rate of 100 per 
minute (hard and fast at a ratio of 30 compressions to 2 breaths) with the intent of 
relieving the obstruction. 
(f) Look in the mouth for objects between compressions and breaths.  After one round of 
compressions and breaths, the  
Grader will state, “You see an object in the casualty’s mouth” 
(g) Remove the object.  Candidate simulates using proper technique. 
8. Reopen airway and repeat the breaths (Steps 3 & 4). 
Grader will state, “You see the chest rise and fall with your breaths, but the casualty is still 
not breathing”. 
48 
 
48 
9. Check for a pulse for five to 10 seconds:  Place tips of index and middle fingers in groove in 
casualty's throat beside the Adam's apple on the side closest to you.  Do NOT use the thumb. 
Grader states, “You do not feel a pulse” 
10. Perform CPR: 
(a) Position your hands and body for chest compressions as in step 7. 
(b) Give 30 compressions: 
(c) Press straight down to depress the breastbone 1 ½ to 2 inches. 
(d) Come straight up and completely release pressure on breastbone to allow chest to return 
to its normal position.  The time allowed for release should equal the time required for 
compression. 
(e) Give 30 compressions in about 23 seconds (at a rate of 100 per minute).  Do NOT 
remove the heel of your hand from the casualty’s chest or reposition your hand between 
compressions.  However, all pressure must be released from the chest cavity to allow for 
full chest wall expansion. 
(f) Give two breaths: 
(g) Open the casualty's airway. 
(h) Give two breaths (1 second each). 
(i) Repeat steps 10a-c for five cycles or two minutes.  After one PROPERLY performed 
cycle, the Grader will state, “Two minutes has elapsed”.  If the candidate does not 
perform the steps properly within two minutes, they will be a NO-GO. 
(j) Reassess the casualty: 
(k) Check for the return of the pulse for 3 to 5 seconds. 
Grader will state, “You feel a pulse” 
(l) Check breathing for 3 to 5 seconds. 
Grader will state, “Casualty is not breathing” 
(m) Give breaths at the rate of one every 5 to 6 seconds (10 to 12 breaths per minute). 
(n) Note:  Breaths should not be over exaggerated or forceful.  After the candidate has 
demonstrated proper performance, grader will state, “Two minutes has elapsed”.  If the 
candidate does not perform the steps properly within two minutes, they will be a NO-GO. 
(o) Recheck for pulse and breathing. 
Grader will state, “The casualty is breathing and conscious” 
(p) Place the casualty in the recovery position (by rolling him/her as a single unit onto his/her 
side, placing the hand of his/her upper arm under his/her chin, and flexing his/her upper 
leg) until help arrives.  Watch the casualty closely for life-threatening conditions, 
maintain an open airway, and check for other injuries. 
(q) Candidate will state that if the casualty’s condition deteriorates, they will continue CPR 
until: 
(r) The breathing and pulse returns. 
(s) They are relieved or stopped by a qualified person. 
(t) They are physically unable to continue. 
Table M3:  Perform first aid to restore breathing and or pulse 
49 
 
49 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Approach and check for responsiveness. 
2.  Roll the casualty to his/her back. 
3.  Open the airway using the head-tilt/chin-lift method 
4.  Check for breathing. 
5.  Insert an NPA. 
6.  Give breaths to ensure an open airway. 
7.  Perform chest compressions to clear the airway. 
8.  Reopen airway and repeat the breaths. 
9.  Check for a pulse. 
10.  Perform CPR. 
 
 
 
50 
 
50 
M-4: Evaluate A Casualty for a Heat Injury 
Task Basis: 081-831-0038-Treat a Casualty for a Heat Injury, TR 350-29  
Tasks:  Identify types, signs, symptoms, and treatment of heat injuries.  Treat for heatstroke. 
Conditions:  You see a Soldier who appears to be suffering from a heat injury and you must 
determine and provide the proper treatment.  The casualty is responsive but confused.  You are 
on a Forward Operating Base and not in a CBRNE environment. 
Standards:  Identify types, signs, symptoms, and treatments within five minutes.  100% 
accuracy for heat cramps.  At least three correct signs and symptoms for both heat exhaustion 
and heat stroke, with no incorrect answers.  At least three treatments for heat exhaustion, with no 
incorrect answers.  Answers must be readable and understandable by the Grader.  Correctly 
provide treatment for heatstroke within five minutes.  All tasks will be performed in sequence. 
Requirements:  Laminated sheet of paper with blank lines for the candidate to fill in 
signs/symptoms and treatments (Treatment not required for heatstroke as the candidate will 
execute).  Alcohol pens and eraser.  A 160-200 lb. mannequin in full ESB uniform.  Ice packs, 
soaked ice sheets, bucket of water, and/or other means of cooling. 
Performance steps 
Identify signs, symptoms, and treatment: 
1. Type:  Heat cramps. 
(a) Signs and symptoms: 
1) Muscle cramps of the arms, legs, and/or abdomen 
(b) Treatment: 
1) Move to shaded area and rest. 
2) Loosen clothing. 
3) Oral rehydration. 
2. Type:  Heat exhaustion. 
(a) Signs and symptoms: 
1) Profuse sweating and pale/gray/moist/cool skin. 
2) Headache. 
3) Weakness. 
4) Dizziness. 
5) Temperature as high as 104 degrees. 
(b) Treatment: 
1) Move the casualty to a shaded area and provide oral rehydration unless nauseated. 
2) Loosen and/or remove the casualty's clothing and boots. 
3) Pour water on the casualty and fan him/her if possible. 
4) Cover with ice sheet; elevate legs. 
3. Type:  Heatstroke. 
(a) Signs and symptoms: 
1) Core temperature rising above 106 degrees within 15 minutes. 
2) Hot, dry skin. 
3) Headache. 
4) Dizziness. 
5) Nausea. 
6) Confusion. 
7) Weakness. 
8) Pulse and respirations are weak and rapid. 
51 
 
51 
(b) Treatment: 
1) Call for evacuation. Candidate verbalizes. 
2) Cool the casualty with any means available, even before taking the clothes off (Unit 
SOP). 
3) Remove the casualty's outer garments and/or protective clothing. 
4) Lay the casualty down and elevate his/her legs. 
5) Immerse the casualty in cold water if available. 
6) Place ice sheets/packs in groin, armpits, and around neck. 
7) Cover all but the face with a soaked ice sheet. 
8) Evacuate the casualty.  Candidate verbalizes. 
Table M-4: Evaluate a casualty for a heat injury 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Heat cramps. 
2.  Heat exhaustion. 
3.  Heat stroke. 
 
 
 
52 
 
52 
M-5: Control Bleeding 
Task Basis: 081-COM-1001-Evaluate a Casualty, 081-000-0048-Apply a Combat Application 
Tourniquet, 081-000-0099-Apply a Hemostatic Dressing 
Tasks:  Evaluate a casualty using Tactical Field Care and control bleeding. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team on a combat patrol that has come under small arms 
fire.  You witness a teammate in the open receive a gunshot wound to the (Grader will state the 
extremity).  Your teammate was able to apply his/her own Combat Application Tourniquet 
(CAT), move to you, and is responsive.  You are behind cover, not under hostile fire, and your 
teammates have established a security perimeter.  You have a CLS bag and are not in a CBRNE 
environment. 
Standards:  Perform all tasks to standard, in sequence, within five minutes, without causing 
further injury. 
Requirements:  A simulated casualty; either an actual Soldier or mannequin (with all 
extremities), with a clearly visible simulated extremity wound and an applied CAT.  The casualty 
will be in a full combat uniform per Unit SOP, including weapon and a fully packed IFAK.  An 
additional, deep, non-arterial wound should be made visible, or the grader should provide a 
prompt during the candidate’s blood sweep.  Casualty should be positioned on the ground where 
the candidate will apply aid.  A CLS bag including an extra CAT, at least two Combat Gauzes, 
and appropriate bandages and dressings.  Provide the candidate with, or ensure the candidate has 
a watch with the correct date and time. 
Performance steps: 
1. Perform a blood sweep of the extremities, neck, armpits, and groin areas. 
(a) Expose wounds if bleeding is detected.  If the second wound is not simulated, the grader 
will identify the location during the blood sweep.  If the candidate fails to sweep that area 
or detect the wound, they are a NO-GO. 
2. Apply a hemostatic dressing to the major non-arterial wound that is bleeding heavily: 
(a) Remove all clothing or equipment to obtain access to the wound. 
(b) Identify the point of bleeding within the wound.  Remove any pooled blood from the 
wound cavity with your hand or a wad of cotton gauze.  Locate the bleeding vessel(s). 
(c) Pack Combat Gauze directly over the source of bleeding; pack the wound with the entire 
dressing. 
(d) Apply direct pressure for 3 minutes; periodically check dressing to ensure placement and 
bleeding control. When performed correctly, 
Grader will state, “Three minutes has elapsed, and wound is still bleeding” 
(e) Pack second Combat Gauze into wound.  When performed correctly, grader will state, 
“Bleeding is under control”. 
(f) wound to secure the dressing in place. 
(g) Apply cotton gauze (either wad or rolled) over the dressing. 
(h) Secure in place with an emergency bandage, elastic bandage, tape, or other type 
available. 
3. Reassess any tourniquets placed during care under fire to ensure they are still effective. 
Grader will state, “The wound spurts blood when the limb is moved” 
(a) Attempt to further tighten the CAT until bleeding stops.  Candidate will verbalize this 
and will ensure to not overtighten if using an actual Soldier as a casualty. 
Grader will state, “The CAT is still ineffective” 
53 
 
53 
(b) Place a second CAT, from the casualty’s IFAK, side-by-side but above the other 
tourniquet: 
(c) Pull free end of self-adhering band through buckle and route through friction adapter 
buckle. On an arm wound, it is not necessary to route the strap through the friction 
adapter. 
(d) Pull self-adhering band tight around extremity and fasten it back on itself as tightly as 
possible. 
(e) Twist the windlass until the bleeding stops. Candidate will verbalize this and will ensure 
to not overtighten if using an actual Soldier as a casualty. 
(f) Lock the windlass in place within the windlass clip and secure the windlass with the 
windlass strap. 
(g) Assess for absence of a distal pulse. Candidate should perform and verbalize with proper 
technique.  Pulse must be taken with skin-to-skin contact and not using their thumb. 
(h) Place a "T" and the time of the application on the casualty with a marker (provided in 
casualty’s IFAK).  This can be simulated and verbalized, or a piece of lamination can be 
applied to the casualty’s forehead so each Candidate can perform the task. 
(i) Secure the CAT in place with tape (provided in casualty’s IFAK). 
(j) Apply a pressure or hemostatic dressing. 
Table M-5:  Control bleeding 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Perform a blood sweep and expose wounds as needed. 
2.  Apply a hemostatic dressing. 
3.  Reassess any tourniquets. 
 
 
 
54 
 
54 
M-6: Evaluate and Treat a Casualty 
Task basis:  081-COM-1001-Evaluate a Casualty, 081-000-0083-Apply a Cervical Collar  
081-68C-3136-Assess for Signs of Shock, 081-COM-1005-Perform First Aid to Prevent or 
Control Shock 081-000-0013-Initiate a Tactical Combat Casualty Care Card 
Tasks:  Identify the signs and symptoms of shock.  Evaluate and treat a casualty for spinal injury 
and shock. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a platoon within a secure Forward Operating Base (FOB) in a 
non-CBRNE environment.  You are assisting another Soldier with an injury to a fellow service 
member and preparing him/her for evacuation while waiting on the Medical Evacuation 
(MEDEVAC).  The other Soldier states that he/she witnessed the casualty fall from a guard 
tower; he/she suspects internal bleeding and a spinal injury.  He/she goes on to state that after 
initially acting fine, the injured Soldier began complaining of nausea, difficulty breathing, and 
abdominal pain.  The injured Soldier is laying on a litter with long spine board when you arrive 
and is alert to pain only.  The uninjured Soldier is available to assist you with spinal stabilization 
and movement of the casualty while you provide treatment.   
Standards:  Identify at least six signs and symptoms of shock with no incorrect answers within 
one minute.  Apply a cervical collar and treat for shock to standard, in sequence, within seven 
minutes, without causing further injury. 
Requirements:  A simulated casualty or mannequin in the complete ESB uniform.  A 
Department of Defense (DD) Form 1380 Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) Card with the 
administrative data already filled out.  A Basic Life Support (BLS) bag with adjustable Cervical 
Collars (one pediatric and one adult), set to incorrect sizes.  Head immobilization blocks.  
Casualty should be positioned on the litter and spine board where the Candidate will apply aid.  
Additional Soldier (if available) to assist.  Laminated sheet of paper with blank lines, alcohol 
pens, and eraser.  Provide the Candidate with, or ensure the Candidate has a stopwatch. 
Performance steps: 
1. Identify signs and symptoms of shock: 
(a) Sweaty but cool skin. 
(b) Pale skin. 
(c) Restlessness or nervousness. 
(d) Thirst. 
(e) Severe bleeding. 
(f) Confusion. 
(g) Rapid breathing. 
(h) Blotchy blue skin. 
(i) Nausea and/or vomiting. 
(j) Low blood pressure. 
(k) Absence of distal pulse. 
(l) Capillary refill delayed more than three seconds. 
2. Apply cervical collar: 
(a) Have the other Soldier kneel at the casualty's head and manually apply in-line 
stabilization of the head and neck.  If the assistant is notional, the Grader will state, “The 
other Soldier has the head and neck in-line and immobilized”. 
(b) Reassure the casualty and explain the procedure to him/her. 
(c) Measure and determine the size of collar to apply. 
55 
 
55 
(d) The front height of the collar should fit between the chin and the chest at the suprasternal 
notch. 
(e) Once in place, the collar should rest on the shoulder girdle and provide firm support 
under both sides of the mandible without obstructing the airway or any ventilation efforts. 
(f) If the collar is too large, the casualty's neck may be placed in hyperextension. 
(g) If the collar is too small, the casualty's neck may be placed in hyperflexion. 
(h) Size the collar based on the manufacturer instructions. 
(i) Apply the collar to a supine casualty. 
(j) Ensure the other Soldier maintains in-line stabilization. 
(k) Set the collar in place around the neck. 
(l) Secure the Velcro strap in place. 
(m) Maintain manual stabilization of the head and neck until the casualty is immobilized on a 
long spine board.  If the assistant is notional, the Grader will state, “The other Soldier has 
the head and neck immobilized”. 
(n) Immobilize casualty to spine board using straps and head immobilization blocks (or 
improvise). 
3. Assess for shock: 
(a) Assess casualty’s level of consciousness. 
Grader will state, “Casualty does not answer, but reacts to pain”. 
(b) Evaluate skin. 
Grader will state, “Skin is pale and moist; abdomen is distended”. 
(c) Assess capillary refill on a finger. 
Grader will state, “Capillary refill takes four seconds”. 
(d) Check for pedal pulse (skin to skin; no thumb). 
Grader will state, “You do not feel a pulse”. 
(e) Check for femoral pulse (skin to skin; no thumb). 
Grader will state, “You do not feel a pulse”. 
(f) Check for radial pulse (skin to skin; no thumb). 
Grader will state, “You do not feel a measurable pulse”. 
(g) Check for carotid pulse (skin to skin; no thumb). 
Grader will state, “You feel a weak but rapid pulse”. 
(h) Measure pulse for 30 seconds (skin to skin; no thumb). 
Grader prompt if using a mannequin. 
(i) Assess respirations. 
Grader will state, “Respirations are rapid but shallow”. 
(j) Measure respirations for 30 seconds. 
Grader prompt if using a mannequin. 
4. Treat for hemorrhagic shock. 
(a) Position the casualty. 
1) Move the casualty under shelter to shade him/her from direct sunlight. 
Note:  Secure casualty to the litter before moving.  If no assistant is available, Candidate will 
verbalize, but still ensure to secure the casualty on the litter. 
(b) Maintain supine position and spinal immobilization. 
(c) Loosen clothing at the neck, waist, or anywhere it is binding. 
56 
 
56 
(d) Prevent the casualty from getting chilled or overheated.  Using a blanket or clothing, 
cover the casualty to avoid loss of body heat by wrapping completely around the 
casualty, underneath the litter straps.  Re-secure the patient on the litter. 
(e) Calm and reassure the casualty; watch the casualty closely for life-threatening conditions. 
5. Correctly record all treatments on the front and back of the TCCC Card: 
(a) Evacuation (EVAC): -Mark an “X” on the casualty’s evacuation priority/precedence 
(Urgent; Priority; Routine). 
(b) Date:  Write date of injury in DD-MMM-YY format.  For example, “29-JUN-13”. 
(c) Time:  Write 24-hour time of injury, and indicate whether local (L) or Zulu (Z) time.  For 
example, “1300Z”. 
(d) Mechanism of Injury:  Mark an “X” on the mechanism or cause of injury (artillery, blunt, 
burn, fall, grenade, gunshot wound (GSW), IED, landmine, motor vehicle crash/collision 
(MVC), rocket propelled grenade (RPG), other (specify)).  Mark all that apply. 
(e) Injury:  Mark an “X” at the site of the injury/injuries on the body picture.  If multiple 
mechanisms of injury and multiple injuries, draw a line between the mechanism of injury 
and the anatomical site of the injury.  (Spinal injury and internal bleeding). 
(f) Time:  Write time of vital signs taken. 
(g) Pulse (rate & location):  Write casualty's pulse rate. 
(h) Respiratory Rate:  Write casualty's respiratory rate. 
(i) AVPU:  Write casualty's level of consciousness (AVPU: Alert, Verbal, Pain, 
Unresponsive). 
(j) Evacuation (EVAC): Mark an “X” on the casualty’s evacuation priority/precedence 
(Urgent; Priority; Routine). 
(k) Other:  Mark an “X” for other treatments administered (combat pill pack, eye shield 
(mark right (R) or left (L)), splint, hypothermia prevention) and type of device(s) used.  
(Cervical collar). 
Notes - Use this space to record any other pertinent information and/or clarifications.  
(Patient exhibiting signs and symptoms of shock). 
(l) First responder name:  Print the first responder’s name (Last, First). 
(m) First responder last 4:  Write last four numbers of first responder’s SSN. 
(n) Secure the TCCC card to the casualty per unit SOP. 
Table Evaluate and treat a causality for a spinal injury and shock 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Identify signs and symptoms of shock. 
2.  Apply a cervical collar. 
3.  Assess for shock. 
4.  Treat for hemorrhagic shock. 
5.  Correctly record all treatments on the front and back of the TCCC card. 
 
 
 
57 
 
57 
M-7: Apply an occlusive dressing and perform a needle chest decompression 
Task Basis:  081-833-0069-Apply an Occlusive Dressing, 081-833-3007-Perform Needle Chest 
Decompression, 081-833-0164-Measure a Patient's Pulse Oxygen Saturation, 081-000-0013 
Tasks:  Treat a chest wound and tension pneumothorax. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team on a combat patrol that has come under small arms 
fire in a non-CBRNE environment.  You witness a teammate in the open receive a gunshot 
wound to upper body.  Your teammate was able to move to you, and is responsive.  You are 
behind cover, not under hostile fire, and your teammates have established a security perimeter.  
You must begin treatment while waiting on medical personnel to arrive.  The injured Soldier is 
alert and complaining of difficulty breathing.  Another Soldier is helping you finish the casualty 
assessment and is obtaining the other vital signs. 
Standards:  Perform all tasks to standard, in sequence, within 10 minutes, without causing further 
injury. 
Requirements:  A simulated casualty (mannequin with all extremities and ribs that can be seen 
and/or felt) in a full combat uniform per unit SOP, including weapon, and a fully packed IFAK.  
Casualty must have two simulated gunshot wounds to the upper body; one on the front (entry) 
and one on the back (exit).  A TCCC card with the administrative data already filled out; alcohol 
pens and eraser.  A Basic Life Support (BLS) bag with occlusive dressings and/or materials with 
which to improvise.  Pulse oximetry device (fingertip) and alcohol swabs.  May cover the screen 
with tape and degraded vitals for testing.  Provide the candidate with, or ensure the candidate has 
a watch with the correct date and time. 
Performance steps: 
1. Apply occlusive dressing: 
(a) Expose the injuries. 
(b) Apply an occlusive dressing to the entry wound. 
(c) Upon full expiration, cover the wound with large, occlusive material dressing, covering 
the first wound encountered. 
(d) Ensure the material extends 2 inches beyond the edge of the wound. 
(e) Tape all four sides of the dressing (If a non-adhesive dressing). 
(f) Log roll the casualty on unaffected side and examine the back for an exit wound. 
(g) Apply an occlusive dressing to the exit wound using the same standards as Step b. 
(a) Verify the presence of tension pneumothorax by checking for at least three of the 
indications below; verbalize as needed: 
(b) Question the casualty about difficulty in breathing, pain on the affected side, or coughing 
up blood, and observe for signs of progressive respiratory distress.  Grader will state, 
“Casualty is gasping for air and has pain on the wound side”. 
(c) Observe the casualty’s bare chest for respiratory rate depth and abdomen for progressive 
distension.  Grader will state, “Casualty has poor respiratory rate and depth, and the 
abdomen is mildly distended”. 
(d) Look for mediastinal shift manifested as a tracheal deviation and/or jugular distension.  
Grader will state, “Casualty does not have tracheal deviation, but has mild jugular 
distension”. 
(e) Look at and feel the patient's chest for signs of air in the chest wall (subcutaneous 
emphysema).  Grader will state, “You feel a crackling sensation on the casualty’s chest”. 
(f) Check for unilateral distension and chest expansion (excursion). 
(g) Place one hand on the affected side. 
58 
 
58 
(h) the other hand on the unaffected side. 
(i) Observe the height of each hand as the chest rises and falls. 
(j) Determine if the height of the hand on the affected side is greater during expiration than 
the height of the hand on the unaffected side. 
Grader will state, “The hand on the unaffected side is higher than the other”. 
(k) Look for bluish skin (cyanosis). 
Grader will state, “You observe mild cyanosis”. 
(l) Look for signs and symptoms of shock. 
Grader will state, “You observe two signs of shock- (Grader choice)”. 
2. Locate the insertion site.  Locate the second intercostal space (between the second and third 
ribs) at the midclavicular line (approximately in line with the nipple) on the affected side of 
the patient's chest. 
3. Thoroughly cleanse a 3-to-4-inch area around the insertion site.  Begin in the center and work 
outward using a circular motion. 
4. Apply a commercial needle decompression kit according to manufacturer’s instructions or 
improvise by inserting a large bore (10 to 14 gauge) needle with attached catheter (steps 
below). 
(a) Place the needle tip, bevel up, on the insertion site (2nd intercostal space, midclavicular 
line). 
(b) Lower the proximal end of the needle to permit the tip to enter the skin just above the 
third rib margin. 
(c) Firmly insert the needle into the skin over the third rib, until the pleura has been 
penetrated, as evidenced by feeling a "pop" as the needle enters the pleural space. 
(d) Remove the needle and discard per unit SOP. 
5. Decompress the affected side by aspirating as much air as is necessary to relieve the patient's 
acute symptoms. 
6. Apply a commercial one-way flutter valve according to instructions or improvise (one 
method below). 
(a) Cut a finger casing from a sterile glove. 
(b) Cut off the fingertip. 
(c) Tie or tape the finger casing to the needle hub. 
(d) Check the operation of the improvised flutter valve. 
(e) Ensure that air passes through the needle-valve assembly and improvised flutter valve on 
expiration. 
(f) Ensure that the flutter valve collapses against itself on inspiration. 
(g) Secure the catheter to the chest. 
7. Measure pulse and O2 SAT.  Candidate can perform this step on themselves or another 
soldier since the casualty must be a mannequin, or Grader may prep the device screen with 
degraded vitals. 
(a) Wipe the index, middle, or ring finger tip with alcohol to ensure it is clean and dry. 
(b) Apply the sensor. 
(c) Document the readings on the TCCC card. 
8. Record all treatments on the TCCC card 
(a) Front of card: 
1) Evacuation (EVAC):  Mark an “X” on the casualty’s evacuation priority/precedence 
(Urgent; Priority; or Routine). 
59 
 
59 
2) Date - Write date of injury in DD-MMM-YY format.  For example, “29-JUN-13”. 
3) Time:  Write 24-hour time of injury, indicating whether local (L) or Zulu (Z) time, 
such as “1300Z”. 
4) Mechanism of Injury:  Mark an “X” on the mechanism or cause of injury (artillery, 
blunt, burn, fall, grenade, gunshot wound (GSW), IED, landmine, motor vehicle 
crash/collision (MVC), rocket propelled grenade (RPG), other (specify)).  Mark all 
that apply. 
5) Injury:  Mark an “X” at the site of the injury/injuries on the body picture.  For burn 
injuries, circle the burn percentage(s) on the figure.  If multiple mechanisms of injury 
and multiple injuries, draw a line between the mechanism of injury and the 
anatomical site of the injury. 
6) Time:  Write time of vital signs taken. 
7) Pulse (rate & location):  Write casualty's pulse rate. 
8) O2 Sat:  Write casualty's O2 Saturation. 
9) AVPU:  Write casualty's level of consciousness (AVPU: Alert, responds to Verbal 
stimulus, responds to Pain stimulus, Unresponsive). 
(b) Back of card: 
1) Evacuation (EVAC):  Mark an “X” on the casualty’s evacuation priority/precedence 
(Urgent; Priority; or Routine). 
2) C:  Mark an “X” for all Circulation hemorrhage control interventions.  For 
tourniquets (TQ), mark category (Extremity, Junctional and/or Truncal) and write 
name of TQ(s) used.  For dressings, mark category (Hemostatic, Pressure, and/or 
Other) and write type of dressing(s) used. 
3) B:  Mark an “X” for all Breathing interventions oxygen (O2), needle decompression 
(Needle-D), Chest-Tube, (Chest-Seal) and write type of device(s) used. 
4) First responder name:  Print the first responder’s name (Last, First). 
5) First responder last 4:  Write last four numbers of first responder’s SSN. 
Table M-7: Apply an occlusive dressing and perform a needle chest decompression 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Apply occlusive dressing. 
2.  Verify the presence of tension pneumothorax. 
3.  Locate the insertion site. 
4.  Thoroughly cleanse a 3” to 4” area around the insertion site. 
5.  Apply a commercial needle decompression kit. 
6.  Decompress the affected site. 
7.  Apply a commercial one-way flutter valve. 
8.  Measure pulse and O2 Saturation. 
9.  Record all treatments on the TCCC card. 
 
 
 
60 
 
60 
M-8: Perform First Aid for an Open Head Wound in a CBRNE Environment 
Task Basis: 081-831-1033-Perform First Aid for an Open Head Wound 
Tasks:  Treat a casualty with an open head wound in a CBRNE Environment. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team on a combat patrol in a CBRNE environment that has 
come under indirect fire.  You witness a teammate in the open receive fragmentation to the head.  
Your teammate was able to move to you and is responsive.  You are behind cover, not under 
hostile fire, and your teammates have established a security perimeter.  You must begin 
treatment while waiting on medical personnel to arrive.  The injured Soldier is conscious and 
alert.  You are in MOPP level three. 
Standards:  Perform all tasks to standard, in sequence, within five minutes, without causing 
further injury. 
Requirements:  A simulated casualty (mannequin with all extremities) with a clearly visible 
simulated head wound.  Casualty will be in a full MOPP level three combat uniform per Unit 
SOP, including weapon and a fully packed IFAK.  Something for the casualty to sit/lean against.  
Unit may degrade this Candidate’s MOPP uniform due to heat considerations but the Candidate 
will wear the complete ESB uniform and protective mask at a minimum. 
Performance steps: 
1. Check the casualty's level of consciousness by asking, "What is your name, where you, and 
what is today's date?"  Grader states, “The casualty replies appropriately”. 
2. Position the casualty. 
(a) Have the casualty sit up. 
(b) Turn head to the side (opposite the wound) to prevent bleeding into the mouth. 
3. Expose the wound by removing the casualty's helmet, if necessary, but retaining all MOPP 
garments.  Do NOT attempt to clean the wound, remove a protruding object, or apply a 
pressure dressing.  Do NOT put unnecessary pressure on the wound or attempt to push any 
brain matter back into the head (skull).  Do NOT touch white (sterile) side of dressing or 
allow it to come into contact with any surface other than wound. 
4. The following procedures are for applying a field dressing.  If you are applying an 
emergency bandage, follow the procedure for other bleeding wounds, while observing 
general guidelines and precautions. 
(a) Apply the casualty's dressing to a wound on the forehead or back of head. 
(b) Apply dressing, white side down, directly over wound with tails extending toward sides 
of head. 
(c) Wrap tails, one at a time, around head in opposite directions, making sure tails cover 
dressing but not eyes or ears. 
(d) Tie the tails at the side of the head using a nonslip knot. 
(e) Apply the casualty's dressing to a wound on the top of head. 
(f) Apply the dressing, white side down, directly over the wound. 
(g) Wrap 1st tail under chin and bring up in front of ear over dressing above and in front of 
the other ear. 
Note:  Ensure tails remain wide and close to the front of the chin to avoid choking the casualty. 
(h) Wrap 2nd tail under chin in opposite direction and up the side of head to meet 1st tail. 
(i) Cross the tails. 
(j) Wrap one tail across forehead above eyebrows to a point just above and in front of 
opposite ear. 
61 
 
61 
(k) Wrap other tail above ear, low over back of head, and above opposite ear to meet the 
other tail. 
(l) Tie the tails using a nonslip knot. 
(m) Apply the casualty's dressing to a wound on the side of the head or cheek. 
(n) Apply dressing, white side down, directly over the wound with the tails extending up and 
down. 
(o) Wrap the top tail over the top of the head, down in front of the ear, under the chin, and up 
over the dressing to a point just above the ear. 
(p) Wrap the other tail in the opposite direction to meet the first tail. 
(q) Cross the tails and complete the procedure as follows: 
(r) Wrap 1st tail across forehead above eyebrows to a point above and in front of opposite 
ear. 
(s) Wrap the 2nd tail above ear, low over back of head, and above opposite ear to meet 1st 
tail. 
(t) Tie the tails using a nonslip knot. 
5. Watch the casualty for life-threatening conditions, check for other injuries, and treat for 
shock.  Seek medical aid. 
Table M-8 Perform first aid for an open head wound in a CBRNE environment 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Check the casualty’s level of consciousness. 
2.  Position the casualty 
3.  Expose the wound. 
4. Apply a field dressing. 
5.  Watch he casualty for life-threatening conditions, check for other injuries, 
treat for shock, and seek medical aid. 
 
 
 
62 
 
62 
M-9: Treat an Open Abdominal Wound and Eye Injuries 
Task Basis:  081-COM-1001-Evaluate a Casualty, 081-831-1025-Perform First Aid for an Open 
Abdominal Wound, 081-000-0127-Initiate Treatment for an Open Abdominal Wound  
081-833-0057-Treat Lacerations, Contusions, and Extrusions of the Eye, 081-COM-1055-Apply 
a Fox Eye Shield 
Tasks:  Perform first aid for an abdominal and eye injury. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team on a mounted combat patrol.  You witness an IED 
immobilize the convoy’s lead vehicle.  You are assisting medics with triage and treatment.  You 
are behind cover, not under hostile fire, and your teammates have established a security 
perimeter.  The medic performed a rapid trauma assessment on the first patient and determined 
that there are no other immediate, life threatening injuries.  The medic directed you to treat the 
open abdominal wound and eye injury (Grader will state type of eye injury if it is not clearly 
simulated).  You have a CLS bag, are not in a CBRNE environment, and the casualty is 
conscious. 
Standards:  Perform all tasks to standard, in sequence, within seven minutes, without causing 
further injury. 
Requirements: A simulated casualty; either an actual Soldier or mannequin (with all 
extremities) with a clearly visible simulated abdominal wound (with simulated organs or 
intestines outside the body) and an eye injury (Grader will select one of the eye injuries options).  
Casualty will be in a full combat uniform per unit SOP, including weapon and a fully packed 
IFAK.  Casualty should be positioned on the ground where the Candidate will apply aid.  A CLS 
bag including all appropriate bandages, dressings, and materials needed to improvise. 
Performance Steps: 
1. Check for both entry and exit wounds (there should only be one) by sitting casualty up or 
rolling to the side. 
2. Position the casualty on back, flex knees, and turn head to side, keeping airway clear in case 
of vomiting. 
3. Expose the wound.  Pick up organs that are on ground using a clean, dry dressing and gently 
place on abdomen without touching them.  Do not probe/clean/try to remove foreign objects 
from or push organs back inside body. 
4. Apply a moist, sterile abdominal dressing.  If an object is extending from wound, do not 
remove it.  Place as much of wrapper over wound as possible without dislodging or moving.  
Do not place wrapper over object. 
(a) Ensure dressing is large enough to cover entire mass of protruding organs or area of the 
wound. 
(b) If large enough to cover affected area, place sterile side of plastic wrapper directly over 
wound. 
(c) Place dressing directly on wound or plastic wrapper if used.  Do not apply pressure or 
expose internal parts. 
(d) Tie dressing tails loosely at casualty's side or secure hooking ends of closure bar into 
bandage. 
(e) Repeat if two dressings are needed.  Ensure that ties of additional dressings are not tied 
over each other. 
(f) Ensure dressing is secured firmly enough to prevent slipping, without applying pressure. 
5. Treat for shock: 
63 
 
63 
(a) Loosen binding clothing and prevent the casualty from getting chilled or overheated.  
While performing this step, the Grader will state, “The casualty is making vomiting 
sounds”. 
(b) Roll to side without causing further injuries.  Grader will state, “Vomiting has stopped”. 
(c) Return to supine position with knees flexed.  Re-secure bandages and blanket if needed. 
6. Treat lacerations and contusions of tissue surrounding the eye (Grader prompt if not 
simulated). 
(a) Close the lid of the affected eye.  Do not exert pressure or manipulate the globe in any 
way. 
(b) Cover the injury with moist, sterile dressing to prevent drying. 
(c) Cover torn eyelids with a loose dressing.  Place field dressing over eye pad or dressing. 
7. Treat injury to the eyeball (Grader prompt if not simulated).  Do not reposition the globe or 
replace it in the socket. 
(a) Cover injured eye with a sterile dressing soaked in saline to keep the wound from drying. 
(b) Place a field dressing over eye pad.  Tell the casualty not to squeeze the eyelids together. 
8. Treat extrusion (Grader prompt if not simulated): 
(a) Cut a hole in several layers of dressing material and then moisten it with saline. 
(b) Place dressing so globe protrudes through hole without touching it.  Build up dressing 
higher than globe. 
(c) Apply Fox eye shield or improvised object such as a paper cup, structural aluminum 
malleable (SAM) splint, or intact set of eyewear secured in place. 
(d) Apply garter shield cover or tape to edges of Fox eye shield or object. 
(e) Place over the injured eye, resting on the bony support of the face and secure with tape. 
9. Treat protruding object (Grader prompt if not simulated):  Immobilize object and dress with 
moist, loose dressing. 
Table M-9:  Treat an open abdominal wound and eye injuries 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Check for entry and exit wounds. 
2.  Position the casualty. 
3.  Expose the wound. 
4.  Apply a moist, sterile abdominal dressing. 
5.  Treat for shock. 
6.  Treat lacerations and contusions of tissue surrounding the eye. 
7.  Treat injury to the eyeball. 
8.  Treat extrusion. 
9.  Treat protruding object. 
 
 
 
64 
 
64 
M-10: Treat a Fracture and a Burn 
Task Basis:  081-831-1034-Perform First Aid for a Suspected Fracture, 081-000-0044-Initiate 
Treatment for Burns 
Tasks:  Perform first aid for a fracture and a burn. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team on a combat patrol.  You witness an IED throw 
several teammates to the ground.  You are assisting medics with triage and treatment.  You are 
behind cover, not under hostile fire, and your teammates have established a security perimeter.  
The medic performed a rapid trauma assessment on the first patient and determined that there are 
no other immediate, life threatening injuries.  The medic directed you to treat the casualty’s 
(Grader states extremity) closed fracture and burn to (Grader states location of burn injury).  You 
have a CLS bag, are not in a CBRNE environment, and the conscious casualty is sitting up. 
Standards:  Perform all tasks to standard, in sequence, within five minutes, without causing 
further injury. 
Requirements:  A simulated casualty; either an actual Soldier or mannequin (with all 
extremities) with a clearly visible simulated fracture to an extremity and a burn injury.  Casualty 
will be in a full combat uniform per Unit SOP, including weapon and a fully packed IFAK.  
Casualty will be seated on ground where candidate will apply aid.  CLS bag including all 
bandages/dressings/splints/materials needed to improvise if required.  All Candidates must be 
provided the same splint/sling/swathe supplies; the graders can provide all options or select one. 
Performance steps: 
1. Reassure casualty and explain the process of treating the fracture, loosen tight/binding 
clothing, and remove jewelry from limb, placing in casualty's pocket. 
2. Check for signs of circulation problems below injury:  Grader prompts the nature of the 
casualty’s circulation.  Check light-skinned persons for skin color (pale, white, or bluish 
gray).  Check dark-skinned persons by depressing toenail or fingernail beds and seeing how 
fast the color returns.  A slower return of color to the injured side indicates a circulation 
problem.  Feel injured arm or leg to see if it is colder than the uninjured one.  Ask about 
presence of numbness, tightness, or cold sensation. 
3. Splint-improvised or SAM splint (Grader choice):  SAM splints do not require padding (no 
femur fractures).  Improvised splints are made from two rigid objects.  Use improvised 
materials to secure the rigid objects/keep fracture immobilized.  Use improvised materials to 
pad the splints.  If splinting materials are not available, use the chest wall to immobilize a 
suspected fracture of the arm and the uninjured leg to immobilize the fractured leg. 
(a) As a rule, splint fracture in position found.  If no circulation below fracture site or limb is 
grossly angulated, you cannot effectively splint it. You may need to gently realign it.  
Note:  Grader will prompt the status of the fracture.  With one hand supporting fracture 
site, use other to grasp part of limb farthest from fracture and gently pull traction. 
(b) Ensure ends of splints do not press against groin.  Pressure could interfere with blood 
circulation. 
(c) Place one splint on each side of arm/leg and pad appropriately.  Make sure splints reach 
beyond joints above and below fracture.  A single SAM splint may be used for small 
fractures such as wrist. 
(d) Tie nonslip knots on splint with improvised or actual cravats.  Do not tie cravats directly 
over the fracture.  Gently place at least two cravats above and two cravats below the 
fracture if possible. 
65 
 
65 
(e) Check splint for tightness.  Make sure cravats are tight enough to hold splinting materials 
securely in place.  Recheck circulation below injury to make sure that circulation is not 
impaired.  Make any adjustments to improve circulation without allowing splint to 
become ineffective. 
4. Sling-actual or improvised (Grader choice):  Make an improvised sling from non-stretching 
material. 
(a) Ensure supporting pressure is on uninjured side and hand of supported arm is slightly 
higher than elbow. 
(b) Recheck circulation below the injury to make sure that circulation is not impaired. 
(c) Make any adjustments to improve circulation without allowing the sling to become 
ineffective. 
5. Swathe (Grader choice):  Apply when there is a splinted fracture of elbow/leg or when 
fracture cannot be splinted. 
(a) Place swathes above and/or below the fracture, not over it. 
(b) Apply swathes to arm by wrapping over injured arm, around casualty's back, and under 
arm on uninjured side.  Tie ends on uninjured side. 
(c) Apply swathes to injured leg by wrapping swathes around both legs and tying on 
uninjured side. 
(d) Recheck circulation below the injury to make sure that circulation is not impaired. 
(e) Make any adjustments to improve circulation without allowing the swathe to become 
ineffective. 
6. Treat burn: 
(a) Cut casualty's clothing away from burns and remove potentially constricting items such 
as rings/bracelets. 
(b) Apply a dry sterile dressing securely but not overly tight.  Cover extensive burns with a 
sterile sheet/linen. 
Table M-10:  Treat a fracture and a burn 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Reassure casualty and explain the process of treating the fracture. 
2.  Check for signs of circulation problems below injury 
3.  Splint. 
4.  Sling. 
5.  Swathe. 
6.  Treat burn. 
 
PATROL LANE 
 
 
66 
 
66 
P-1: Adjust Indirect Fire 
Based on: 061-283-6003-Adjust Indirect Fire, 071-326-0512-Estimate Range 
Task: Call for indirect fire. Adjust indirect fire. Fire for effect. 
Condition: You are a senior leader in a platoon or company during a traveling over watch 
movement in a non-CBRNE environment. Your adjacent unit has come under fire from (Grader 
states type and size of target, as well as cardinal direction to target) and is requesting fire 
support. Do you identify your target? You have no Forward Observer in your element. You have 
a 10-digit grid to your location and (Grader states type of mortars/artillery) available. 
Standard: Transmit a call for fire, utilizing a grid mission, to the FDC within three minutes of 
target identification, locating the target within 250 meters. State direction to target within 100 
mils/5 degrees with or before the first correction. Adjust fire to within 50 meters of the target 
using at least two but no more than six bracketing corrections, calling each adjustment within 45 
seconds of the previous round impact. Fire for effect, transmit the results, and end the mission 
within 30 seconds of the final adjusting round impact. All tasks will be performed in sequence, 
using the proper radiotelephone pronunciation and procedures, with 100% accuracy. 
Station Requirements: A protractor, military map with the correct declination diagram, and 
compass. Mil-reticle binoculars or other magnified optical device with mil markings and a stable 
platform to view the target. The 10-digit grid to the Candidate’s location and all call signs 
required. Two operational radios, powered on, with operational frequencies programmed. 
Laminated paper, superfine point alcohol pens, eraser, and a basic calculator. While all 
information will be available in the holding area, during testing the Candidate must not be given 
any Graphic Training Aids (GTAs), cheat sheets, etc. At the test site, the Candidate must not be 
able to see any of the information/equipment until time has started. Grader must have a cheat 
sheet/overlay for the Candidate’s initial target plot. 
Performance Measures: 
(1) Target setup: The intent of this task is for the Candidate to actually have to look 
through binoculars and talk on the radio during the entire task rather than stand over a 
terrain model/sand table. As a result, a target such as a building or fighting position 
must be created to scale based on the desired distance and the actual distance from the 
Candidate. 
(a) The Grader will stand at the target location and after saying, “Shot over”, will move to 
the calculated location.  
(b) Upon moving to the impact area, the Grader will raise one hand for several seconds to 
signify that the round has impacted, and cue the Candidate to begin their next calculation. 
(c) The Grader must know the exact distance scale to mark the round impacts accurately 
based on the Candidates corrections. For example, at 2000 meters a 25-meter-long 
fighting position will appear as 12.5 mils and a 50-meter-long building will appear as 25 
mils. If this situation were scaled down to 50 meters away from the Candidate: 
(d) That same 25-meter fighting position will be .625 meters long and still appear as 12.5 
mils. 
(e) That same 50-meter building will be 1.25 meters long and still appear as 25 mils. 
(f) If the Candidate makes a 50-meter correction, the Grader would move 1.25 meters. 
(g) If the Candidate makes a 400-meter correction, the Grader would move 10 meters. 
(h) At 4000 meters a 25-meter-long fighting position will appear as 6.25 mils and a 50-
meter-long building will appear as 12.5 mils. If this situation were scaled down to 50 
meters away from the Candidate: 
67 
 
67 
(i) That same 25-meter fighting position would be .3125 meters long and still appear as 6.25 
mils. 
(j) That same 50-meter building would be .625 meters long and still appear as 12.5 mils. 
(k) If the Candidate makes a 50-meter correction, the Grader would move .625 meters. 
(l) If the Candidate makes a 400-meter correction, the Grader would move 5 meters. Other 
distances or target sizes may be used, but: 
(m) They must be represented accurately and to scale. 
(n) The Candidate must know the actual size of the enemy target. 
(o) The simulated target should be far enough away to require the Candidate to use the 
binoculars. 
(2) Transmit the Call for Fire: 
(a) Candidate plots their location on the map. 
(b) Candidate determines direction to target using compass. 
(c) Candidate estimates distance to target using mil-relation method based on known size. 
(d) Candidate plots the enemy location on the map. 
(e) Candidate transmits call for fire to the FDC using three transmissions. 
1) Send observer identification and warning order. 
2) Send eight-digit grid to the target location. Must be accurate within 250 meters. 
3) Send target description, method of engagement, and method of fire and control 
(direction if desired). 
(3) Adjust Fire: 
(a) If not already sent, give direction to target within 100 mils or five degrees as a four-digit 
number. 
(b) Adjust rounds. Grader will stand at or point to the Candidate’s initial impact location. 
Regardless of how accurate the grid was, the Grader should put the initial impact far 
enough away to require at least two corrections. All impact locations must be given 
accurately based on the target scale and the Candidate’s stated corrections. 
(c) Spot each round when it impacts as right or left, over or short of your target. 
(d) Determine corrections for deviation left or right of the target. Measure the horizontal 
angle in mils, using reticle pattern in binoculars. Estimate range to target and divide by 
1,000. This is the Observer-Target (OT) factor. If OT distance is 1,000 meters or greater, 
the OT Factor is expressed to the nearest whole number. If OT distance is less than 1,000 
meters, the OT factor is expressed to the nearest 1/10th. For example, 800 = 0.8. 
Multiplying the OT factor by the deviation measured in mils produces deviation 
corrections in meters. 
(e) When the first range spotting is observed, make a range correction that would result in a 
range spotting in the opposite direction. NO-GO if the Candidate does not bracket 
correctly. For example, if you estimate that the first round impacted 50 mils left and 250 
meters short on a target that is 2100 meters away, add enough to get an over on the next 
round. You must add 400 meters to start successive bracketing procedures. With an OT 
factor of 2, the round impacted 100 meters left. Your correction to the FDC is "RIGHT 
100-ADD 400-OVER". 
(f) Continue splitting the range bracket until a 100-meter bracket is split or range correct 
spotting is observed, maintaining deviation on line, and transmitting all corrections to the 
FDC in meters. After each correction the Grader will state, “Shot over”, and the 
68 
 
68 
Candidate will reply with “Shot out”. The Grader will move to the new impact location, 
raise one hand for several seconds, and wait for the Candidate’s next correction. 
(g) Use the following guide to establish a bracket. When the estimated round impact distance 
to the target is: 
1) More than 400 meters, add or drop 800 meters. 
2) More than 200 but less than 400 meters, add or drop 400meters. 
3) More than 100 but less than 200 meters, add or drop 200meters. 
4) Less than 100 meters, add or drop 100 meters. 
5) Add or drop 50 meters and announce Fire for Effect. 
(4) Fire for Effect: 
(a) When a 100-meter bracket is split or a range correct spotting is made, the fire-for-
effect phase is entered. 
(b) Observe the results of fire for effect. Give a brief description of what happened to 
the target. Example: "EOM, TARGET DESTROYED, ESTIMATE TWO 
CASUALTIES, OVER. 
Table. P-1: Adjust Indirect Fire 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Target Setup 
2.  Transmit the Call for Fire 
3.  Adjust Fire 
4.  Fire for Effect 
 
 
 
69 
 
69 
P-2: Move Under Direct Fire 
Task basis:  071-COM-0502-Move 
Tasks:  Move under direct fire 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting movement to contact and are under fire 
from an enemy position that is 200 meters away from your position. 
Standards:  Correctly and safely perform all steps, in sequence, within 5 minutes. 
Requirements:  Candidate will start the task in full ESB uniform with one magazine of blank 
rounds and a sling on their weapon.  Grader may provide verbal cues as to the enemy rate of fire, 
use a pneumatic gun, or have opposing force (OPFOR) Soldiers returning fire with blanks.  
Hearing protection (part of the ESB uniform) must be worn when firing.  A 100-meter route will 
be created using a variety of natural and man-made obstacles that will, in conjunction with the 
enemy rate of fire, force the candidate to use a specific movement technique.  Generally, the lane 
should start with the rush, transition to the high crawl, followed by the low crawl, ending with 
destroying the enemy; modify as required. 
Performance steps: 
1. Select a route that adheres to the instructions provided by your team leader. 
Note:  Grader will brief the candidate the left and right limits of the station. 
A. Search the terrain to your front for good firing positions.  Large trees, rocks, stumps, 
fallen timber, rubble, vehicle hulls, man-made structures, and folds or creases on the 
ground may provide both cover and concealment. 
B. Select the best route to the positions.  A gully, ravine, ditch, or wall at a slight angle to 
your direction of travel may provide cover and concealment when using low/high crawl 
movement techniques.  Hedge rows or a line of thick vegetation may provide 
concealment only when using the low or high crawl technique.  Pick a route that 
minimizes your exposure to enemy and does not cross in front of team members. 
2. Communicate your movement intent to your buddy/team leader, using voice or hand and arm 
signals.  Candidate will return fire, move to cover, and yell the direction, distance and 
description. 
3. Suppress the enemy as required throughout the movement. 
4. Conduct movement using the appropriate techniques to reach each position.  These three 
techniques do not need to be in sequence, but instead must be employed correctly based on 
the terrain and enemy situation.  Using an incorrect technique for the circumstances or an 
incorrect sequence of subtasks will be a NO-GO. 
(a) Move using high crawl technique.  This lets you move faster than the low crawl and still 
gives you a low silhouette.  Use when there is good cover and concealment, but enemy 
fire prevents you from getting up. 
1) Keep your body off of the ground, resting your weight on your forearms and lower 
legs. 
2) Cradle your weapon in your arms and keep the muzzle of the weapon off the ground. 
3) Keep your knees well behind your buttocks so it stays low. 
4) Move forward by alternately advancing your right elbow/left knee, and left 
elbow/right knee. 
(b) Move using low crawl technique.  The low crawl gives you the lowest silhouette.  It is 
used to cross places where cover and/or concealment are very low and enemy fire or 
observation prevents you from getting up. 
1) Keep your body as flat as possible to the ground. 
70 
 
70 
2) Grasp the sling of the weapon at the upper sling swivel with your firing hand. 
3) Let the hand guard rest on your forearm and keep the muzzle of the weapon off the 
ground. 
4) Move forward. 
5) Push both arms forward while pulling your firing side leg forward. 
6) Pull on the ground with both arms while pushing with your firing side leg. 
7) Repeat until you reach your next position. 
(c) Move using rush technique.  The rush is the fastest way to move from one position to 
another.  Use when you must cross an open area and time is critical. 
1) Raise your head and select your next position. 
2) Lower your head and draw your arms into your body. 
3) Pull your firing side leg forward, raise your body, and get up quickly. 
4) Run for 3-5 seconds to your next position. 
5) Plant both feet just before hitting the ground; fall forward and drop to your knees. 
6) Slide your firing hand down to the heel of the butt of your weapon, using it to break 
your fall. 
5. Occupy your identified firing position within 100 meters of the enemy position and engage 
the enemy. 
Note:  Grader will verbalize the destruction of the enemy.  Time will stop. 
Table P-2:  Move under direct fire 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Select appropriate route. 
2.  Communicate your movement. 
3.  Suppress the enemy. 
4.  Conduct movement using the appropriate techniques. 
5.  Occupy your identified firing position within 100 meters of enemy and 
engage. 
 
 
 
71 
 
71 
P-3: Tactical Handheld Radio 
Task basis: 113-000-1016-Operate Simple Key Loader (SKL) AN/PYQ-10, 031-UCS-3174-
Operate the Simple Key Loader (SKL) KG-175D, 113-100-1138-Operate Multi-band Inter/Intra 
Team Radio (MBITR),  
113-587-2007-Input Program Data into AN/PRC-152 Multi-Band Multi-Mission Handheld 
Radio (MMHR) 
Tasks:  Assemble and load Communications Security (COMSEC) into a tactical handheld radio 
using an SKL.  Program it for secure, frequency hopping, SINGARS voice communications 
using a DAGR.  Conduct a radio check using an external headset/handset. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team who has been directed to prepare the unit radios for 
dismounted operations in a non-CBRNE environment.  You are in the patrol base preparing to 
move to the Objective Rally Point.  Enemy presence is suspected. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all tasks, in sequence, using the proper radio telephone operator 
(RTO) pronunciation and procedures within 8 minutes. 
Requirements:  One set of signal operating instructions (SOI) according to unit standard 
operating procedure (SOP), with all pertinent frequencies and details listed.  All call 
signs/suffixes required and an information sheet showing the appropriate COMSEC for each 
week of the month.  One operational, tactical handheld radio with no frequencies programmed, 
no COMSEC loaded, set up for communication via internal microphone/speaker, and 
disassembled.  A second operational, tactical radio loaded with training COMSEC and pertinent 
frequencies for the Grader to use.  All other necessary radio basic inventory items (BII).  A 
Simple Key Loader (SKL) with all necessary BII and loaded with four weeks of training 
COMSEC keys.  A DAGR with all BII, properly set up with the correct time.  The frequencies, 
COMSEC, and message to be transmitted must differ between the training week, test holding 
area, and at least two test sites. 
Performance steps: 
1. Assemble the radio. 
(a) Battery. 
(b) Antenna. 
(c) Headset or external microphone/speaker (May be done after loading COMSEC). 
2. Power on the radio. 
3. Load the appropriate COMSEC keys into the radio with an SKL. 
(a) Select the correct COMSEC keys for the appropriate week. 
(b) Load the correct hop set. 
4. Program one secure, operational frequency into the radio according to the SOI. 
(a) CT; SINGARS; frequency hop. 
5. Change the settings to allow the radio to communicate via headset or external 
microphone/speaker. 
6. Set the time with a DAGR. 
7. Radio check.  It is a NO-GO if the Candidate is unable to communicate with the Grader on 
the specified frequency or the Candidate uses improper RTO pronunciation or procedures. 
Table P-3:  Operate tactical handheld radio 
72 
 
72 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Assemble the radio. 
2.  Power on the radio. 
3.  Load the appropriate COMSEC into the radio with an SKL. 
4.  Program one secure operational frequency into the radio. 
5.  Change the settings to allow the radio to communicate. 
6.  Set the time with a DAGR. 
7.  Conduct radio check. 
 
 
 
73 
 
73 
P-4: Defense Advanced GPS Receiver (DAGR) Operations 
Task basis:  113-000-1016-Operate Simple Key Loader (SKL) AN/PYQ-10, 031-UCS-3174-
Operate the Simple Key Loader (SKL) KG-175D, 301-PRO-6026-Load the DAGR with Crypto 
Variable (CV) Keys 301-PRO-6011-Enter Waypoints in the DAGR, 301-PRO-6012-Program a 
Route into the DAGR, 301-PRO-6016-Operate the DAGR in a Jamming Environment 301-PRO-
6515-Bring AN/PSN-13 Defense Advanced Global Positioning Receiver (DAGR) to an 
Operational State When Satellite Signals are Weak or Lost  
Tasks:  Load two months of crypto keys into the DAGR and set to use only secure satellites.  
Enter mission duration, enter waypoints, and create a route.  Operate DAGR when satellite 
signals are weak. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team who has been directed to prepare for dismounted 
operations in a non-CBRNE, Electronic Warfare (EW) contested environment.  You are in the 
forward operating base (FOB) preparing to move to the Objective Rally Point.  Grader states 
mission duration; crypto key rollover will occur during your mission. 
Standards:  Correctly perform all tasks within 15 minutes. 
Requirements:  One set of Signal Operating Instructions (SOI) according to unit SOP, with all 
pertinent information showing the appropriate crypto for each month.  One properly set up 
DAGR, with all necessary Basic Inventory Items (BII), including a DAGR fill cable.  A Simple 
Key Loader (SKL) with all necessary BII and loaded with two months of training crypto.  Three 
10-digit grids for the candidate to enter as waypoints and create the route. 
Performance Steps: 
1) Load current months and next month’s crypto keys into the DAGR. 
2) Restrict DAGR to use only secure satellites. 
3) Enter mission duration. 
4) Mark present position as a waypoint. 
5) Enter three waypoints given. 
6) Create a route using all four waypoints in the correct order. 
7) Place DAGR in “Average Mode”. 
Table P-4:  Defense advanced GPS received (DAGR) operation 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Load current months and next month’s crypto keys into the DAGR. 
2.  Restrict DAGR to use only secure satellites. 
3.  Enter mission duration. 
4.  Mark present position as a waypoint. 
5.  Enter three waypoints given. 
6.  Create a route using all four waypoints in the correct order. 
7.  Place a DAGR in “Average Mode”. 
 
 
 
74 
 
74 
P-5: Camouflage and Visual Signaling Techniques 
Task basis:  052-COM-1361-Camouflage Yourself and Your Individual Equipment 071-COM-
0608-Use Visual Signaling Techniques  
Tasks:  Subtly employ realistic camouflage that resembles the background to your skin, uniform, 
weapon, and equipment.  Demonstrate visual signaling techniques. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a team preparing to establish an ambush position in a non-
CBRNE environment.  You are in the patrol base preparing to move to the Objective Rally Point.  
Enemy presence is suspected. 
Standards:  Correctly apply camouflage within 10 minutes or less.  Correctly demonstrate each 
of the 15 visual signaling techniques within 10 seconds of receiving the prompt. 
Requirements:  Both appropriate and inappropriate camouflage items based on the environment 
and the candidate’s uniform/packing list.  The training area should contain a mannequin or an 
actual Soldier who is completely camouflaged correctly and appropriately.  The color charts and 
other graphic references from the appropriate references must also be available in the training 
area.  The candidate must know how to apply camouflage correctly, what the standard is for their 
environment/equipment, and be given the means/materials to succeed.  The unit will choose 
which 15 visual signaling techniques are to be used; they must be the same 15 that were used 
during practice week.  Different visual signaling techniques may be used based on valid Army 
publications. 
Performance steps: 
Camouflage: 
1. Subtly employ realistic camouflage that resembles the background without overdoing. 
2. Use natural or artificial materials to breakup regular shapes, outlines, and equipment. 
3. Reduce possible shine by covering or removing items that may reflect light. 
4. Blend colors with the surroundings, ensuring that objects do not contrast with the 
background. 
5. Camouflage your exposed skin. 
(a) Cover your skin oils, using paint sticks, even if you have very dark skin. 
(b) Note:  Do not use oils or insect repellant to soften paint sticks.  This defeats the purpose 
of paint sticks by making the skin shiny.  Do not use mud, paint containing motor oil, or 
other field expedient paints. 
(c) Use the color chart when applying paint on the face. 
(d) Paint high, shiny areas (forehead, cheekbones, nose, ears, and chin) with a dark color. 
(e) Paint low, shadow areas (around the eyes, under the nose and under the chin) with a light 
color. 
(f) Paint exposed skin on the back of the neck, arms, and hands with an irregular pattern.  
6. Camouflage your uniform and helmet. 
(a) Roll your sleeves down and fasten all buttons/zippers/Velcro. 
(b) Attach leaves, grass, small branches, or other items to your uniform/helmet that will 
distort shapes and blend colors with the natural background.  Soldiers must be aware of 
foliage hazards/poisonous leaves. 
(c) Wear unstarched uniforms. 
(d) Do not wear excessively faded or worn uniforms because camouflage effectiveness is 
lost. 
7. Camouflage your personal equipment. 
(a) Cover or remove shiny items. 
75 
 
75 
(b) Secure items that rattle or make noise when moved and/or worn. 
(c) Breakup the shape of large and/or bulky equipment using natural or man-made items. 
Visual Signaling Techniques: 
8. Combat formations: 
(a) Disperse:  Extend the arm horizontally.  Wave the arm and hand to the front, left, right, 
and rear.  Point toward the direction of each movement. 
(b) Assemble or rally:  Raise arm vertically overhead.  Turn palm to the front.  Wave in large 
horizontal circles.  Point to assembly or rally site. 
(c) Join me, follow me, or come forward:  Point toward person(s) or unit.  Beckon by 
holding the arm horizontally to the front with palm up.  Motion toward the body. 
(d) Increase speed, double time, or rush:  Raise the fist to the shoulder.  Thrust the fist 
upward to the full extent of the arm and back to shoulder level.  Continue rapidly several 
times. 
(e) Quick time:  Extend the arm horizontally sideward.  Turn palm to the front.  Wave the 
arm slightly downward several times, keeping the arm straight.  Keep arm at shoulder 
level. 
(f) Enemy in sight:  Hold the rifle in the ready position at shoulder level.  Point rifle in the 
direction of enemy. 
(g) Wedge:  Extend the arms downward to the side.  Turn the palms to the front.  Place your 
arms at a 45degree angle below horizontal. 
(h) Vee:  Raise the arms.  Extend the arms 45-degrees above the horizontal. 
(i) Line:  Extend the arms.  Turn palms downward parallel to the ground. 
(j) Coil:  Raise one arm above the head.  Rotate it in a small circle.  
(k) Staggered column:  Extend the arms so that upper arms are parallel to the ground.  Make 
sure the forearms are perpendicular.  Raise the arms so they are fully extended above the 
head. 
9. Battle drills: 
(a) Contact left or right: (Grader choice).  Extend the left/right arm parallel to the ground.  
Bend the arm until the forearm is perpendicular.  Repeat. 
(b) Action left or right: (Grader choice).  Extend both arms parallel to the ground.  Raise the 
left/right arm until it is overhead.  Repeat. 
(c) Air attack:  Bend the arms with forearms at a 45-degree angle.  The forearms should 
cross.  Repeat. 
(d) Nuclear, biological, or chemical attack:  Extend the arms and fists.  Bend the arms to the 
shoulders.  Repeat. 
(e) Patrolling: 
(f) Map check:  Place one hand on top of other.  Point at palm of one hand with index finger 
of other hand. 
(g) Pace count:  Bend knee so that heel can be tapped on.  Tap heel of boot repeatedly with 
the open hand. 
(h) Head count:  Raise one arm behind the head.  Tap the back of the helmet repeatedly with 
an open hand. 
(i) Danger area:  Raise one hand up until it is level with the throat.  Draw the hand, palm 
down in a throat cutting motion across the neck. 
(j) Freeze or halt:  Make a fist with one hand.  Raise the fist to head level. 
10. Control drivers: 
76 
 
76 
(a) Start engine or prepare to move:  Simulate cranking of the engine by moving the arm, 
with the fist, in a circular motion at waist level. 
(b) Halt or stop:  Raise the hand upward to the full extent of the arm, with palm to the front.  
Hold that position until the signal is understood. 
(c) Left or right turn:  Grader choice.  Extend the opposite arm horizontally to the side.  Turn 
palm toward vehicle with finger extended in the direction of travel. 
(d) Move forward:  Face the vehicle.  Raise the hands to shoulder level with palms facing the 
chest.  Move the hands and forearms backward and forward. 
(e) Move in reverse:  Face the vehicle.  Raise the hands to shoulder level with palms facing 
the vehicle.  Move the hands and forearms backward and forward. 
(f) Stop engine:  Extend the arm parallel to the ground with hand open.  Move the arm across 
the body in a throat-cutting motion. 
Table P-5:  Camouflage and visual signaling techniques 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Subtly employ realistic camouflage that resembles the background; 
2.  Use natural or artificial materials to breakup regular shapes. 
3.  Reduce possible shine by covering or removing items that may reflect light. 
4.  Blend colors with the surroundings. 
5.  Camouflage your exposed skin. 
6.  Camouflage your uniform and helmet. 
7.  Camouflage your personal equipment. 
8.  Combat formations. 
9.  Battle drills. 
10.  Patrolling. 
11.  Control drivers. 
 
 
 
77 
 
77 
P-7: Chemical and Biological Operations 
Task basis:  031-COM-1004-Protect Yourself from Chemical and Biological (CB) 
Contamination Using Your Assigned Protective Mask, 031-COM-1006-Decontaminate your 
Skin, 031-COM-1011-Decontaminate Individual Equipment 
Tasks:  Assume MOPP level three.  Decontaminate your skin and equipment, assuming MOPP 
level four. 
Conditions:  You are a member of a platoon within a secure Forward Operating Base (FOB).  
You are in MOPP level two when you suspect a chemical/biological attack. 
Standards:  Don, clear, and seal the mask within nine seconds and perform all remaining tasks 
to standard, in sequence, within 1 minute.  Correctly decontaminate and assume MOPP level 
four within 5 minutes.  
Requirements:  Candidate’s own functional, properly maintained mask with optional mask 
hood.  Properly fitted Joint-service lightweight integrated suit technology (JSLIST) coat, 
trousers, over-boots, and gloves for the candidate to wear.  Training decontamination lotion and 
wipes/mitts or simulated materials; standard is written for wipes.  Poncho or overhead cover. 
Performance steps: 
Assume MOPP level three: 
1. Don mask assembly. 
(a) Stop breathing and close eyes. 
(b) Remove helmet, put helmet between legs above knees or hold rifle between legs and 
place helmet on the muzzle.  If helmet falls continue to mask. 
(c) Take off glasses and place in helmet, if applicable. 
(d) Open the mask carrier with non-firing hand. 
Nine second time standard starts. 
(e) Grasp the mask assembly with firing hand and remove it from the carrier. 
(f) Place chin in the chin pocket and press the face piece tight against face. 
(g) Hold mask assembly tightly against face. 
(h) Grasp the harness tab, pull the harness over and down the head as far as possible.  Ensure 
the head harness is centered on the crown of the head and the temple straps are 
approximately parallel to the ground. 
(i) Grasp the loose end of the cheek straps, one at a time, and pull until strap feels tight. 
Note:  Both straps should be approximately equal length when complete.  The temple and 
forehead straps have already been adjusted during fitting; do not tighten. 
2. Clear mask assembly. 
(a) Seal the outlet disk valve by placing one hand over the outlet valve cover assembly. 
(b) Blow out hard to ensure that any contaminated air is forced out around the edges of the 
face piece. 
3. Seal mask assembly. 
(a) Cover both filter inlet ports with the palms of your hands and breathe in. 
(b) Ensure mask assembly collapse against the face. 
(c) Resume breathing. 
Nine second time standard stops. 
4. Give the alarm. 
(a) Shout, "Gas, Gas, Gas”. 
(b) Give the appropriate hand-and-arm signal per unit SOP. 
5. Close mask carrier. 
78 
 
78 
6. Don the mask hood, if applicable. 
Note: If the Soldier is using the mask in conjunction with the joint-service, lightweight integrated 
suit technology (JSLIST), he/she skips this step (the mask lacks a hood because it is built in on 
the JSLIST).  Be careful when pulling on the hood because it could snag and tear on the buckles 
of the head harness.  Be careful not to break face piece seal when pulling protective hood over 
your head. 
(a) Place hands under protective hood, stretch elasticized portion and raise protective hood 
up and over filters. 
(b) Carefully pull excess protective hood material over head, neck, and shoulders. 
(c) Grasp underarm straps. 
(d) Bring the male end of each underarm strap and fasten to female end. 
(e) Leave underarm straps loose enough to allow decontamination. 
(f) Assume MOPP Level four: 
7. Seek overhead cover or use a poncho for protection against further contamination; put helmet 
down. 
8. Decontaminate your hands, face, and the inside of your mask. 
(a) Remove one RSDL packet from your carrying pouch. 
(b) Safety: Avoid contact with eyes and wounds.  If contact with eyes or wounds occurs, 
rinse with water as soon as possible. 
(c) Tear it open quickly at any notch. 
(d) Remove the applicator pad from the packet and save the packet as the remaining lotion 
can be added to the applicator pad, if required. 
(e) Thoroughly scrub the exposed skin of your hand, palm, and fingers with the applicator 
pad. 
(f) Note: The applicator pad can be used from either side and may be gripped in any manner 
allowing the applicator pad to be applied to the skin. 
(g) Switch the applicator pad to the other hand and repeat the procedure. 
(h) Stop breathing, close eyes, grasp mask beneath chin and pull mask away from chin 
enough to allow one hand between the mask and your face.  Hold the mask in this 
position. 
(i) Thoroughly scrub the exposed skin of your face with lotion from the applicator pad. 
(j) Thoroughly scrub across your forehead. 
(k) Beginning at one side, scrub up and down across your cheeks, nose, chin, and closed 
mouth.  Avoid ingesting. 
(l) Scrub under the chin from the ear along the jawbone to the other ear to coat your skin 
with lotion. 
(m) Turn your hand over and scrub the inside surfaces of the mask that may touch your skin.  
Be sure to include the drinking tube. 
(n) Note:  Do not apply lotion to the lens of the protective mask.  The RSDL may cause loss 
of transparency. 
(o) Keep the applicator. 
(p) Seal your mask immediately, clear it, and check it. 
(q) Use the applicator and any remaining lotion in the packet.  Without breaking the mask 
seal, scrub the applicator pad across the forehead, exposed scalp, the skin of the neck, 
ears, and throat. 
(r) Secure and tighten the hood. 
79 
 
79 
(s) Thoroughly scrub your hands with lotion again as in the steps above. 
(t) Assume MOPP Level 4 by putting on protective gloves; fasten Velcro. 
9. Decontaminate your equipment (M295 or M334). 
(a) Open the M334 at either end where the kit is notched. 
(b) Remove one M334 packet from the kit. 
(c) Open an M334 packet at a notch on the packet. 
(d) Remove the individual wipe from the packet and unfold completely. 
(e) Decontaminate all contaminated individual equipment by wiping the surface using 
sweeping motions away from the body.  Take care not to spread contamination to any 
area that has been visually determined clean.  Note: M334 individual wipe may leave 
behind a film on decontaminated surfaces.  This film may alter how certain surfaces (i.e., 
optics, reflective surfaces) process light.  Refer to the decontaminated equipment's TM 
for cleaning procedures, as some surfaces may require specific procedures to avoid 
damaging the surface.  In the absence of cleaning procedures, a lens cloth has been found 
to be an effective means of removing any film left behind by the M334 individual wipe. 
(f) Note:  The wipe may be folded/refolded as necessary to maximize use of the clean areas 
of the wipe, to obtain the proper grip, and to ensure even contact pressure.  When wiping, 
pay special attention to areas that are hard to reach, such as cracks, crevices, and 
absorbent materials.  To avoid premature evaporation of the solvent, do not open a new 
M334 packet until needed. 
(g) Dispose of contaminated waste material in accordance with unit SOP. 
Table P-7:  Chemical and biological operations 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Don mask assembly. 
2.  Clear mask assembly. 
3.  Seal mask assembly. 
4.  Give the alarm. 
5.  Close mask carrier. 
6.  Don the hood, if applicable. 
7.  Seek overhead cover. 
8.  Decontaminate your hands, face, and the inside of your mask. 
9.  Decontaminate your equipment. 
 
 
 
80 
 
80 
P-8: Resection and Military Maps 
Task basis:  071-COM-1015-Locate an Unknown Point on a Map and on the Ground by 
Resection, 071-COM-1000-Identify Topographic Symbols on a Military Map, 071-COM-1001-
Identify Terrain Features on a Map  
Tasks:  Determine your location.  Identify terrain features, colors, and contour lines.  Identify 
topographic symbols.   
Conditions:  You are a member of a team conducting tactical operations and have a requirement 
to determine your current location. 
Standards:  Determine the correct six-digit grid to your location using resection within five 
minutes.  Identify five major, three minor, and two supplementary terrain features, what the six 
basic colors represent, and the three types of contour lines within five minutes with 100% 
accuracy.  Correctly identify 22 topographic symbols within ten minutes. 
Requirements:  A protractor, straight edge, calibrated compass, and military map(s) (use as 
many maps as required to ensure all terrain features are represented).  Laminated paper with 
blank lines labeled appropriately (one for candidate’s grid, five for the major terrain features, 
three for the minor terrain features, two for the supplementary terrain features, six for the colors, 
and three for the contour lines).  The 22 topographic symbols with a blank line next to each for 
the candidate to write the number.  Alcohol pens and eraser.  The map for resection must have 
two clearly identifiable features that are visible to the candidate.  If the local terrain is limited, E-
Type targets, vehicles, etc. may be used as long as they are clearly plotted and labeled on the 
map.  The map(s) for identifying symbols/features must have each item to be identified clearly 
labeled.  The training area will have the figures and illustrations from the individual tasks 
(ITASKs), as well as any additional references.  While all the information will be available in the 
holding area, during testing the candidate must not be given any graphic training aids (GTAs), 
cheat sheets, etc.  At test site, the candidate must not be able to see any of the 
information/equipment until time has started.  Do not use the actual grid to the site for test week. 
Performance steps: 
1. Resection: 
(a) Identify your location on a map by resection using the map and compass method. 
1) Orient the map on a flat surface using a compass. 
2) Identify at least two well-defined points on the ground. 
3) Mark these well-defined points on the map. 
4) Plot the back azimuths of these points on the map. 
(b) Determine the magnetic azimuth from your location to one of the defined points. 
(c) Convert the magnetic azimuth to a grid azimuth. 
(d) Convert this grid azimuth to a back-grid azimuth. 
(e) Place the index point of a protractor on the well-defined point. 
(f) Align the protractor's 0- to 180-degree line to the top of the map's north-South grid line. 
(g) Ensure the 0-degree mark is pointing to the north (or top of map). 
(h) Place a tick mark on the map beside the number on the protractor that corresponds to the 
computed back grid azimuth. 
(i) Draw a straight line from the well-defined point to the tick and beyond. 
(j) Repeat for each well-defined point. 
(k) Identify the point where the lines intersect as your location. 
(l) Determine the six-digit grid coordinates to this location. 
(m) Identify your location on a map by resection using the straightedge method. 
81 
 
81 
(n) Orient your map on a flat surface using terrain association. 
(o) Locate at least two known distant locations or prominent features on the ground. 
(p) Plot these distant locations or prominent features on the map. 
(q) Draw a resection line for each of these plotted points. 
(r) Lay a straightedge on one of the two known points on the map. 
(s) Rotate the straightedge on the map until straightedge lines up with both the known 
position on the map and the known position in the distance. 
(t) Draw a line along straightedge away from the known position on the ground toward your 
position. 
(u) Repeat for each plotted point. 
(v) Identify the point where the lines intersect as your location. 
(w) Determine the six-digit grid coordinates to this location 
2. Identify terrain features and colors on a map: 
               (a)  Major terrain features: 
                    (1)  Hill. 
                    (2)  Saddle. 
                    (3)  Valley. 
                    (4)  Ridge. 
                    (5)  Depression. 
               (b)  Minor terrain features: 
                    (1)  Draw. 
                    (2)  Spur. 
                    (3)  Cliff. 
               (c)  Supplementary terrain features: 
                    (1)  Cut. 
                    (2)  Fill. 
               (d)  Colors: 
                     (1)  Blue:  Hydrography or water features such as lakes, swamps, rivers, and 
drainage. 
                     (2)  Black:  Cultural (manmade) features such as buildings and roads, surveyed spot 
elevations, and all labels. 
                     (3)  Green:  Vegetation with military significance such as woods, orchards, and 
vineyards. 
                     (4)  Brown:  All relief features and elevation such as contours on older edition maps 
and cultivated land on red light readable maps. 
                     (5)  Red:  Cultural features, such as populated areas, main roads, and boundaries, on 
older maps. 
                     (6)  Red-brown:  Cultural features, all relief features, non-surveyed spot elevations, 
and elevation such as contour lines on red light readable maps. 
               (e)  Contour lines. 
                    (1)  Index. 
                    (2)  Intermediate. 
                    (3)  Supplementary. 
3. Identify Topographic Symbols: 
(a) Identify the sheet name. 
(b) Identify the sheet number. 
82 
 
82 
(c) Identify the series name. 
(d) Identify the scale. 
(e) Identify the series number. 
(f) Identify the edition number. 
(g) Identify the index to boundaries. 
(h) Identify the adjoining sheets diagram. 
(i) Identify the elevation guide. 
(j) Identify the declination diagram. 
(k) Identify the bar scales. 
(l) Identify the contour interval note. 
(m) Identify the spheroid note. 
(n) Identify the grid note. 
(o) Identify the projection note. 
(p) Identify the vertical datum note. 
(q) Identify the horizontal datum note. 
(r) Identify the control note. 
(s) Identify the preparation note. 
(t) Identify the printing note. 
(u) Identify the grid reference box. 
(v) Identify the unit imprint and symbol. 
Table P-8: Resection and military map reading 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Identify your location on a map using resection. 
2.  Identify major terrain features. 
3.  Identify minor terrain features. 
4.  Identify supplementary terrain features. 
5.  Identify what the colors on a military map indicate. 
6.  Identify what the 3 types of contour lines on a military map. 
7. Identify topographic symbols. 
 
 
 
83 
 
83 
P-9: Operate PVS-14 Monocular Night Vision Device 
Based On: 071-706-0001 Operate the AN/PVS-14 Monocular Night Vision Device 
Task: Prepare, mount and operate a set of AN/PVS-14 Monocular Night Vision Device. Identify 
characters in no light/ low light conditions. Correctly Stow AN/PVS-14s. 
Conditions: You are member of a squad conducting operations in limited visibility and have an 
AN/PVS-14 monocular night vision device (NVD) that is prepared for operation. You have all 
your assigned personal equipment. You are conducting operations in a non-CBRN environment. 
Standards: Place the AN/PVS-14 NVD into operation under normal conditions in one minute 
while wearing your helmet in no light/ low light conditions. Correctly identify and record 3 
alpha/numeric symbols with a 100% accuracy in no light/ low light conditions using correctly 
adjusted AN/PVS14s in 30 seconds or less. Properly stow the AN/PVS-14 NVD after use in 
sequence in under 1 minute in lighted conditions. 
Station Requirements: A tent or other light proof structure, which will contain a table to place 
AN/PVS-14 Nods, carrying case, and all appropriate BII. AN/PVS-14s will be staged with 
working battery correctly installed and Diopter knobs mal- adjusted. Also, candidate will be 
provided with a grade sheet to record three alpha/numeric combinations. A system to temporally 
expose/cover three different letter/number combinations which are only readable from the 
candidate’s position will correctly worn and adjusted NVDs. A light source will be available for 
the “stow” portion of the task to facilitate steps “3 d” and “3 h”. 
Candidate will start in the standing position not touching the equipment. 
Performance Steps 
1. Operate AN/PVS-14 under normal conditions. Use the AN/PVS-14 mounted on a helmet. 
(a) Don the helmet (will maintain helmet on until step 3). 
(b) Place the NVD in the socket of the helmet mount. 
(c) Depress the side buttons (or press down on side lever on metal mount) to set the eye 
relief. 
(d) Move the NVD fore or aft until the eyecup comfortably seals around the eye. 
(e) Turn the NVD ON. 
(f) Rotate the diopter adjustment for the clearest view of the image intensifier screen. 
(g) Adjust the eye relief distance. 
(h) Press the side buttons (or press down on side lever on metal mount). 
(i) Slide the NVD fore or aft to obtain a full field-of-view of the image. 
(j) Adjust the objective lens focus, while observing an object, until the sharp image is 
obtained. 
(k) Grasp the helmet tilt and flip-up assembly and rotate upward and rearward until the latch 
is firmly engaged. Note: The NVD will automatically power off when flipped up. 
(l) Grasp the helmet tilt and flip-up assembly and rotate downward and forward until the 
latch is firmly engaged. 
(m) Turn the power switch to the ON position to resume viewing. 
2. Identify 3 alpha/numeric symbols in low light/ no light conditions in under 30 seconds. 
(a) (grader will expose 3 distinct Letter/Number Combinations) candidate records all three 
exposed letter/number combinations on provided grade sheet then steps back when 
complete. 
3. Stow the AN/PVS-14. 
(a) Turn NVD OFF. 
(b) Remove the NVD from the headset or helmet mount. 
84 
 
84 
(c) Remove battery or batteries. 
(d) Inspect the battery compartment for corrosion or moisture. 
(e) Replace battery cap. 
(f) Remove eyecup, demist shield, sacrificial window, compass or 3X magnifier. 
(g) Replace eyepiece and objective lens cap. 
(h) Ensure monocular is clean and dry before placing into carrying case. 
(i) Replace all equipment in the carrying case. 
Table. P-9: Operate Pvs-14 Monocular Night Vision Device 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Operate AN/PVS-14 under normal conditions. Use the AN/PVS-14 mounted on a helmet. 
2.  Identify 3 alpha/numeric symbols in low light/ no light conditions in under 30 seconds. 
3.  Stow the AN/PVS-14. 
 
 
 
85 
 
85 
P-10: Transmit a SPOT Report with a Tactical Man Pack Radio 
Task basis:  113-589-2004-Operate TACSAT Radio Set AN/PRC-117 in all modes of operation, 
171-300-0063-Operate the Single Channel (SC) Ground and Airborne Radio System, Advanced 
System Improvement Program Radio 071-326-0512-Estimate Range 171-COM-4080-Send a 
SPOTREP 
Tasks:  Assemble and load Communications Security (COMSEC) into a tactical man packable 
or vehicle mounted radio, program it for both Line of Sight (LOS) and Satellite (SAT) voice 
communications, then conduct a LOS radio check.  Use this radio to transmit your SPOTREP. 
Conditions: You are a member of a team who has been directed to prepare your radio for 
operations in a non-CBRNE environment.  Next, you have moved to an observation post (OP) 
and are witnessing enemy operations.  Intelligence reporting gives the size of your target as 
(Grader states height or width of target, ensuring candidate identifies it). 
Standards:  Assemble, load, and program the radio and conduct a LOS radio check within five 
minutes.  Correctly transmit a SPOTREP within 10 minutes.  All tasks will be performed in 
sequence, using the proper radiotelephone (RTO) pronunciation and procedures. 
Requirements: Calibrated compass, mil-reticle binoculars or other magnified optical device 
with mil markings, and a stable platform to view the target.  10-digit grid to candidate’s location, 
a protractor, and military map with declination diagram.  Blank piece of laminated paper, alcohol 
pens, and eraser.  One set of Signal Operating Instructions (SOI) according to unit SOP; all 
pertinent frequencies listed.  All call signs required and an information sheet showing the 
appropriate COMSEC for each week of the month.  One operational, tactical, man 
packable/vehicle-mounted radio with no frequencies programmed, no COMSEC loaded, 
disassembled, with all Basic Inventory Items (BII).  An operational, tactical radio loaded with 
training COMSEC and pertinent frequencies for the grader to use.  A Simple Key Loader (SKL) 
with all BII, loaded with four weeks of training COMSEC keys.  Provide the candidate with, or 
ensure the candidate has a watch with the correct date and time.  Grader must have a cheat 
sheet/overlay for the candidate’s target plot.  Target setup:  The candidate must actually have to 
look through binoculars and talk on the radio during the SPOTREP rather than stand over a 
terrain model.  As a result, a target such as a building, vehicle, or person/E-type target will be 
used at actual distance.  If the local area does not permit enough distance, a target must be 
created to scale based on the desired distance and the actual distance from the candidate.  For 
example, a person that is 19.5 inches (.495 meters) wide is 4.95 mils at 100 meters.  At 2000 
meters a 6.7-meter-long tank will appear as 3.35 mils.  A 25-meter-long fighting position will 
appear as 12.5 mils.  If this situation were scaled down to 50 meters away from the candidate: 
That same tank will be .1675 meters long and still appear as 3.35 mils.   That same fighting 
position will be .625 meters long and still appear as 12.5 mils. Other distances or target sizes 
may be used, but: They must be represented accurately and to scale. The candidate must know 
the true size of the target regardless of whether it is scaled or actual distance. The simulated 
target should be far enough away to require the candidate to use the binoculars. If distances 
beyond 100 meters are available, use actual size targets rather than scaled.  Consider placing 
training site on a roadway, power line cut, or elevated position in order to achieve more distance. 
Performance steps: 
1. Assemble, load, program, and radio check: 
(a) Assemble and power on radio.  Battery/batteries/power supply, LOS antenna, and 
headset/external microphone/speaker. 
(b) Load the correct COMSEC keys for the appropriate week into the radio with an SKL. 
86 
 
86 
(c) Program one secure (SC; cypher text (CT)), operational frequency, into the radio 
according to the SOI. 
(d) Radio check: 
Note:  NO-GO if candidate cannot communicate on this frequency/uses improper 
pronunciation/procedures so long as it is not an equipment failure. 
Send SPOTREP: 
2. Prepare SPOTREP. 
1. LINE 1:  Date time group (DTG) of report submission. 
2. LINE 2:  Reporting unit and method of observation:  unaided, binoculars, infrared, 
thermal, night vision device, unmanned aircraft system, or other.  Follow with narrative if 
needed. 
3. LINE 3:  Size of detected element: 
(a) Persons:  Military, Civilian. 
(b) Vehicles:  Military, Civilian. 
(c) Equipment: Military, Civilian. 
4. LINE 4:  Activity of detected element at DTG of report (sub-type if applicable).  If 
needed add narrative. 
(a) Attacking (direction from). 
(b) Air defense artillery (ADA) (engaging). 
(c) Aircraft (engaging) (rotary wing [RW], fixed wing [FW]). 
(d) Ambush improvised explosive device (IED) [exploded], IED [unexploded], sniper, 
anti-armor, other). 
(e) Indirect fire (point of impact, point of origin). 
(f) Chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear (CBRN). 
(g) Defending (direction from). 
(h) Moving (direction from). 
(i) Stationary. 
(j) Cache. 
(k) Civilian (criminal acts, unrest, infrastructure damage). 
(l) Personnel recovery (isolating event, observed signal). 
(m) Other (give name and description). 
5. LINE 5:  location (grid coordinate with military grid reference system (MGRS) grid zone 
designator of detected element activity or event observed).  Must send correct six-digit 
grid. 
(a) Candidate plots their location on the map. 
(b) Candidate determines direction to target using compass. 
(c) Candidate estimates distance to target using mil-relation method based on known 
size. 
(d) Candidate plots the enemy location on the map. 
6. LINE 6:  Unit (detected element unit, organization, or facility).  If it cannot be identified 
it should be described in detail to include; uniform, vehicle markings, or other identifying 
information. 
(a) Conventional. 
(b) Irregular. 
(c) Coalition. 
(d) Host nation. 
87 
 
87 
(e) Nongovernmental organization (NGO). 
(f) Civilian. 
(g) Facility. 
7. LINE 7:  Time (DTG of observation). 
8. LINE 8:  Equipment element observed (and amplifying sub-type, if applicable).  
Narrative can be added to clarify/describe/explain the equipment.  
Nomenclature/type/quantity of all equipment observed should be provided if known.  If 
equipment cannot be identified, it should be described in as much detail as possible. 
(a) ADA (missile (man-portable air defense system [MANPADS]), missile (other), gun). 
(b) Artillery (gun (self-propelled [SP]), gun (towed), missile or rocket, mortar) 
(c) Armored track vehicle (tank-personnel carrier-command and control-engineer-
transport-other). 
(d) Armored wheel vehicle (gun, APC, C2, engineer, transport, other). 
(e) Wheel vehicle (gun, C2, engineer, transport, other). 
(f) Infantry weapon (anti-armor, RPG, machine gun, grenade launcher, small arms, 
other). 
(g) Aircraft (RW-attack/utility/observation helicopter; FW-
attack/transportation/UAS/other). 
(h) Mine/IED (buried, surface, vehicle-borne IED, person-borne IED, other). 
(i) CBRN. 
(j) Supplies (class III, class V, other). 
(k) Civilian. 
(l) Other. 
9. LINE 9:  Assessment (reason for/purpose of activity and threats to/opportunities for 
friendly forces). 
10. LINE 10:  Narrative (actions taken related to the activity: attack-withdraw-observe-
other).  Potential for subsequent reports:  air support-BDA-call for fire-casualty report-
EOD support-MEDEVAC-other. 
11. LINE 11:  Authentication (report authentication) per SOP. 
3. Send SPOTREP to next higher element. 
 
Table P-10:  Transmit a spot report with a tactical man pack radio 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Assemble, load, program, and conduct radio check. 
2.  Prepare SPOTREP. 
3.  Send SPOTREP to next higher element. 
 
 
 
88 
 
88 
ESB-3: Arctic Focus, (ECWCS) Protect Yourself in Extreme Cold Weather. 
Task: Protect Yourself and Fellow Soldiers in Extreme Cold Weather. 
Conditions: In a field environment given a scenario with weather conditions and temperature. 
Standards: Explain the acronym COLD and the three layers of the ECWCS. Explain the five 
types of glove and their level of protection and the seven levels of the Generation III ECWCS 
within ten minutes. 
Evaluation preparation: Setup: Evaluator has the Cold Weather Smart Card (GTA 20-01-001 1 
FEB 2013), the five sets of gloves, and the seven layers of the ECWCS.  
Brief to Candidate: Tell the candidate to explain the acronym COLD and the three layers of the 
ECWCS. The Soldier then will be asked to explain the five types of gloves and their level of 
protection and the seven levels of the Generation III ECWCS. 
Performance Measures: 
Soldier explains COLD. 
Soldier describes the three layers. 
Soldier describes the five sets of gloves for Cold Weather and handling of POL. 
Soldier describes the seven levels of the GEN III ECWCS. 
Performance Steps: 
1. Candidate will Describe the acronym COLD. 
C – Keep it Clean. 
O – Avoid Overheating. 
L – Wear Clothing Loose and Layered. 
D – Keep Clothing Dry. 
2. The Candidate will explain the three layers of the ECWCS. (verbatim) 
1) Base Layer – also known as inner or wicking layer, the base layer(s) are designed to wick 
excess moisture away from your body 
2) Insulation Layer – intermediate layer(s) that provides volume to enable you to trap warm 
air between your body and outer garments. 
3) Outer Shell Layer – external layer that protects you from the elements providing 
protection from wind and moisture. 
3. Correctly identify and Explain the five (5) types of gloves and their level of protection. 
1) Glove inserts  
(a) Not a stand-alone item; to be worn inside of a glove or mitten shell. 
(b) When sizing glove shell, ensure the gloves fit comfortably while wearing insert and 
that they do not restrict circulation. 
2) Glove shell; effective to 14 degrees Fahrenheit 
Every Soldier reacts differently in the cold and may need to change gloves at varying 
temperatures. 
3) POL handling glove 
(a) Only glove authorized for wear when handling fuel products. 
4) Trigger Finger Mittens; effective to -20 degrees Fahrenheit 
(a) Can be worn with either type of insert. 
(b) Some Soldiers need to wear shells only during physical activity to prevent over 
sweating. 
5) Arctic Mittens; effective to -60 degrees Fahrenheit 
(a) Can be worn with either type of insert 
89 
 
89 
(b) Gloves may be stored under Gen III shell to keep warm and prevent accumulation of 
snow inside the mittens. 
(c) Do not wear with Trigger Finger Mittens. 
4. Correctly identify and Explain the seven (7) levels of the Generation III ECWCS  
1) Level 1 (Base Layer) 
(a) Lightweight Cold Weather Undershirt and Drawers. 
(b) Long sleeve top and full-length bottom constructed from silk weight moisture 
wicking polyester. 
(c) Material aids in movement of moisture from the skin to the outer layers. 
2) Level 2 (Base / Insulation Layer) 
(a) Mid-weight Cold Weather Shirt and Drawers. 
(b) Long sleeve top and full-length bottom garments constructed out of polyester ‘grid’ 
fleece. (Waffle top and bottoms) 
(c) Grid fleece provides an increase of surface area for transportation of moisture away 
from the wearer during movement. 
(d) Can be worn next to skin or over Level 1 for additional insulation. 
3) Level 3 (Insulation Layer) 
(a) Fleece Jacket is the primary insulation layer for use in moderate to cold climates. 
(b) Thermal pro, animal fur mimicking insulation provides an increase in warmth to 
weight ratio along with a reduction in volume when packed. 
4) Level 3 Fleece is not an outer layer. 
5) Level 4 (Outer Shell) 
(a) Wind Cold Weather Jacket is made of a lightweight, wind resistant and water 
repellant material. 
(b) Acts as a minimum outer shell layer, improving the performance of moisture wicking 
layers when combined with Body Armor and / or the ACU. 
6) Level 5 (Outer Shell) 
(a) Soft Shell Cold Weather Jacket and Trousers. 
(b) Made of a water and wind resistant material that increases moisture vapor transfer. 
(c) Increased breathability improves performance of insulation layers by decreasing 
saturation due to moisture vapor accumulation. 
(d) Provides a reduction in weight, bulk, and noise signature during movement. 
(e) Designed for cold / dry climate. 
7) Level 6 (Outer Shell) 
(a) Extreme Cold / Wet Weather Jacket and Trousers. 
(b) A waterproof layer for use in prolonged or hard rain and cold / wet conditions. 
(c) Designed for cold / wet climate. 
8) Level 7 (Outer Shell) 
(a) Extreme Cold Weather Parka and Trousers. 
(b) Provides superior warmth with low weight and volume. 
(c) Water and wind resistant, provides moderate wind and moisture protection. 
(d) Sized to fit over body armor 
(e) For extreme cold weather climates; the outer most layer of protection. 
(f) Meant for static positions or halts in movement. 
ESB-3: Arctic Focus, (ECWCS) Protect Yourself and Fellow Soldiers in Extreme Cold Weather 
90 
 
90 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
Candidate will Describe the acronym COLD. 
The Candidate will explain the three layers of the ECWCS. 
Correctly identify and Explain the five (5) types of gloves and their level of protection. 
Correctly identify and Explain the seven (7) levels of the Generation III ECWCS  
 
 
 
91 
 
91 
ESB-4: Arctic Focus, Identify and Perform First Aid for Cold Weather Injuries 
Task: Identify and Perform First Aid for Cold Weather Injuries 
Conditions: The Soldier sees a casualty who has signs and symptoms of a cold weather injury. 
Standards: Given the necessary equipment and materials consisting of a canteen with potable 
water, blanket or similar items to use for warmth, and dry clothing. The Soldier correctly 
identifies the type of cold weather injury and performs the correct first aid within ten 10 minutes. 
Evaluation preparation: 
Setup: Utilizing another Soldier or a mannequin as the simulated casualty. Walk the Soldier 
through the injury or injuries to be evaluated. If using another Soldier, coach the simulated 
casualty on how to answer questions about symptoms. Physical signs and symptoms that the 
casualty cannot readily simulate must be described to the Soldier performing aid. 
Brief to Candidate Tell the candidate to determine what type of cold weather injury the casualty 
has. After the cold weather injury has been identified, ask the Soldier to describe the proper 
treatment. 
Performance Measures: 
Identified the type of cold weather injury. 
Provided the proper first aid for the cold weather injury. 
Performance steps: 
1. Identify & Treat Chilblain/ Frostnip 
(a) Identify the signs and symptoms of Chilblain / Frostnip.  
1) Prolonged exposure of bare skin at temperatures of 60 degrees Fahrenheit to 32 
degrees Fahrenheit. 
2) Redness or pallor of affected areas. 
3) Absence of pain (numbness) 
4) May have ulcerated bleeding skin lesions. 
(b) Explain the treatment of Chilblain / Frostnip. (Do not rub or massage the area)  
1) Apply rewarming (body heat). 
2) Apply warmth with casualty’s bare hands. 
3) Blow warm air on the affected area. 
4) For hands and fingertips, place hands in armpits. 
5) Protect lesions (if present) with dry sterile dressing. 
6) Seek medical aid. (If the condition does not respond to simple care, begin first aid for 
frostbite). 
Note: Freezing of superficial skin tissue may occur with frostnip; however, there is no freezing 
of the deeper tissues. 
2. Identify & Treat Frostbite (superficial & deep). 
(a) Identify Frostbite  
a. Superficial Frostbite 
1) Loss of sensation or numb feeling in any part of the body. 
2) Sudden whitening of the skin in the affected area followed by a momentary 
tingling feeling. 
3) Redness of skin in light-skinned Soldiers, grayish coloring in dark-skinned 
Soldiers. 
b. Deep Frostbite 
1) Blisters. 
2) Swelling or tender areas. 
92 
 
92 
3) Loss of previous feeling of pain in the affected area. 
4) Frozen area feels solid or wooden to the touch  
5) Pale, yellowish, waxy-looking skin. 
(b) Explain the treatment of Frostbite. 
1) Warm the area using firm, steady pressure of hands, underarm, or abdomen. 
2) Face, ears, nose - cover with hands (casualty’s or a buddy’s) 
3) Hands – open casualty’s field jacket and place against the body (under armpits if 
possible), then close the jacket. 
4) Feet – remove boots, socks, and place feet under clothing and against the body of 
another Soldier. 
5) Loosen or remove constricting clothing and remove any jewelry. 
6) Increase insulation (cover with blanket or something similar and dry). 
7) Have the casualty exercise as much as possible, avoiding trauma to injured part or 
parts. 
8) Long exposure of feet to wet conditions at temperatures from 50 degrees to 32 
degrees Fahrenheit. 
9) Seek medical aid. Monitor the casualty for life-threatening conditions and apply 
appropriate first aid as necessary. 
Caution: Do not rub snow on the frostbitten part, massage or rub the frostbitten part, use dry or 
radiant heat to rewarm, rupture blisters, use ointments or other medications on the affected area, 
handle a frostbitten extremity roughly, allow a thawed extremity to refreeze, or allow the 
casualty to use alcohol or tobacco products. 
Caution: Do not remove clothing in a chemical environment. Do not attempt to thaw the 
casualty’s feet, or other seriously frozen areas, if the Soldier will be required to walk or travel to 
a medical center to receive medical treatment. The possibility of injury from walking is less 
when the feet are frozen than after they have been thawed (if possible, avoid walking). Thawing 
in the field increases the possibility of infection, gangrene, or further injury. 
3. Identify and treat Immersion foot /trench foot 
(a) Identify the signs and symptoms of Immersion foot / trench foot 
1) Early stage / first phase 
a. Affected area feels cold. 
b. Numb and painless. 
2) Later stage / advanced phase 
a. Limbs feel hot and burning. 
b. Shooting pains. 
c. Affected area is pale with bluish cast. 
d. Pulse strength decreased. 
e. Other signs that may follow include blisters, swelling, redness, heat, 
hemorrhages, or gangrene. 
(b) Explain the treatment of Immersion foot / Trench foot. 
1) Gradually rewarm by exposing to warm air. 
2) Protect affected parts from trauma. 
3) Dry feet thoroughly and avoid walking. 
4) Elevate the affected part. 
5) Seek medical treatment (evacuate the casualty). 
4. Identify & Treat Snow Blindness.  
93 
 
93 
(a) Identify Snow Blindness 
1) Scratchy feeling in eyes, as if from sand or dirt. 
2) Watery eyes. 
3) Redness. 
4) Headache. 
(b) Explain the treatment of Snow blindness. 
1) Cover the eyes with a dark cloth. 
2) Seek medical treatment (evacuate the casualty). 
3) Increased pain with exposure to light. 
5. Identify & Treat Hypothermia. (mild & severe)  
Caution: This is a medical emergency! Prompt medical treatment is necessary. 
 
(a) Identify the signs and symptoms of Mild Hypothermia (body temperature 90-95 degrees 
Fahrenheit). 
1) Conscious, but usually apathetic or lethargic. 
2) Shivering. 
3) Pale cold skin. 
4) Slurred speech. 
5) Poor muscle coordination. 
(b) Explain the treatment of Mild Hypothermia 
1) Move to warm dry environment. 
2) Replace damp clothing with dry clothing. 
3) Add extra insulation under and around casualty. Rewarm body evenly. (Must provide 
heat source – campfire or other Soldier’s body) Note: Merely placing the casualty in a 
sleeping bag or covering with a blanket is not enough since the casualty is unable to 
generate his or her own body heat. 
4) Give warm liquids gradually if the casualty is conscious. 
5) Package moderately hypothermic casualty in a hypothermia wrap 
6) Seek medical treatment immediately (evacuate the casualty). 
7) Faint pulse. 
(a) Identify the signs and symptoms of Severe Hypothermia (body temperature 90 degrees or 
lower Fahrenheit). 
1) Breathing slow or shallow. 
2) Irregular heart action. 
3) Pulse weaker or absent. 
4) Stupor or unconsciousness. 
5) Ice cold skin. 
6) Rigid muscles. 
(b) Explain the treatment of Severe Hypothermia. 
1) Stabilize the temperature.  
2) Replacing damp clothing with dry clothing. 
3) Attempt to avoid further heat loss.  
4) Package in a hypothermia wrap. 
Note: Rewarming a severe hypothermic casualty in the field is extremely dangerous. There is a 
great possibility of complications such as rewarming shock and disturbance in the rhythm of the 
heartbeat. 
5) Handle carefully; rough treatment may cause the heart to stop. 
94 
 
94 
6) Use supplemental o2 or begin rescue breathing if breathing stopped. 
7) Evacuate the casualty immediately using the gentlest means available and monitor the 
casualty for life-threatening conditions. 
8) Glassy eyed. 
Caution: Hypothermia is a medical emergency. Prompt medical treatment is necessary. Casualty 
should be evacuated to a Medical Treatment Facility immediately. 
6. Identify & Treat Dehydration.  
(a) Identify the signs and symptoms of Dehydration 
1) Mouth, tongue, and throat are parched and dry. 
2) Swallowing is difficult. 
3) Nausea and dizziness. 
4) Fainting. 
5) Tired and weak. 
6) Muscle cramps especially in the legs. 
7) Focusing eyes may be difficult. 
(b) Explain the treatment of Dehydration 
1) Keep warm. 
2) Loosen clothing to improve circulation. 
3) Give fluids for fluid replacement. 
4) Rest. 
5) Seek medical assistance. 
Table. ESB-4: Arctic Focus, Identify and Perform First Aid for Cold Weather Injuries 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
Identify & Treat Chilblain/ Frostnip 
Identify & Treat Frostbite (superficial & deep). 
Identify and treat Immersion foot / trench foot 
Identify & Treat Snow Blindness.  
Identify & Treat Hypothermia. (mild & severe)  
Identify & Treat Dehydration. 
 
 
 
95 
 
95 
ESB-5: Arctic Focus, Evacuate A Hypothermic Casualty 
Task: Evacuate a Hypothermic Casualty 
Conditions: In a field environment on terrain no greater than class 2 given a simulated non-
ambulatory hypothermia patient, a SKEDCO litter, 60M static climbing rope, 4 locking 
carabiners, sleeping bags, ponchos, insulating pads, Hypothermia Prevention & Management Kit 
(HPMK), and a requirement to move a simulated hypothermia casualty to a suitable LZ for air 
evacuation; while wearing fighting load carrier, ballistic helmet, and weapon. 
Standards: Package a casualty for transport in a hypothermia wrap within 10 minutes. Package 
a casualty for transport in a SKEDCO in horizontal orientation within 10 minutes.  
Performance Measures:  
1. Package a Casualty with a Hypothermia Wrap 
(a) Change the environment the casualty is in from cold and wet to warm and dry. 
(b) Replace damp clothing with dry clothing. 
(c) Add a windproof / waterproof layer and / or place the casualty in a shelter. 
(d) Add extra insulation under and around the casualty. 
(e) Provide the casualty with food and warm liquids. 
(f) Exercise mildly hypothermic patients. 
(g) Package a moderately hypothermic casualty in a hypothermia wrap. 
(h) Lay a poncho on the ground. 
(i) Lay an insulating pad on top of the poncho. 
(j) Lay a closed sleeping bag on top of the insulating pad. 
(k) Lay an open sleeping bag on top of the first one. 
(l) Place the patient inside. Add a hot water bottle to the chest area. Do not place it directly 
to the skin. Zip the sleeping bag closed. 
(m) Place a third, open sleeping bag on top of the second. 
(n) Fold the poncho around the patient like a burrito. 
(o) Place the whole package onto the SKEDCO or other litter for evacuation. 
2. Conduct Horizontal Transport of a Casualty on a SKEDCO 
(a) SKEDCO is unrolled and placed next to the patient. 
(b) Casualty is placed on litter with arms at side (unless injured). 
(c) Four body straps used to secure the patient to the litter. 
(d) Feet straps secured last with straps running around the outside of the feet. 
(e) Head Strap (shorter webbing) inserted through the lift slot, routed under sled and through 
slot on the opposite side. 
(f) Foot strap (longer webbing) inserted through the lift slot, routed under sled and through 
slot on the opposite side. 
(g) Straps equalized and secured with a large steel locking carabiner. 
Table ESB-5: Arctic Focus, Evacuate a Hypothermic Casualty 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
Package a Casualty with a Hypothermia Wrap 
Conduct Horizontal Transport of a Casualty on a SKEDCO 
 
PHASE FOUR 
12-Mile Foot March 
CONCEPT 
96 
 
96 
The final phase of the EIB/ ESB test is the 12-mile Foot March and Final Event. The Foot March 
is executed in accordance with the guidance listed in this publication and ATP 3-21.18. All 
Candidates must successfully complete the 12-mile Foot March in three hours or less, 
immediately followed by the Final Event, which must be completed within five minutes or less. 
See Chapter 12 for the Final Event performance measures. The 12-mile Foot March and Final 
Event is not re- testable.  
Conditions: The Foot March may be executed during the day or at night at the discretion of the 
EIB/ ESB Board. The Foot March route must be 12 miles in length, clearly marked, and easily 
identifiable by the Candidates. The length of the route must be verified through the use of a 
calibrated distance measuring wheel. If a calibrated measuring wheel is not available then the 
course can be verified by using the average odometer reading taken from three different vehicles. 
Route selection needs to include consideration for ease of movement, consistent terrain features, 
and no obstructions along the route that would require the Candidates to maneuver around. The 
slope of the terrain should be similar in nature to the terrain that the Candidates had been 
conducting their conditioning and training on. Units should take every effort to plan the Foot 
March along a route closed to vehicular traffic; if this is not possible, positive safety control 
measures need to be put in place to ensure Candidates are protected from vehicles. Units will 
ensure that medics are stationed along the route, ambulances are available, and that safety 
vehicles are used along the route during this event. If the route requires a turn-around point, it 
must be easily recognizable by the Candidates. It must allow the Candidates to turn around 
without impeding each other or causing congestion. Units need to establish control measures 
along the route, including turns and turn-around points, to ensure Candidates remain on the 
route. Water points need to be established along the route with reasonable distance between each 
water point. At a minimum, water should be available every three miles along the route. Units 
will ensure there are at least two official timing devices which have been calibrated for the Foot 
March. While it is not required, Units are encouraged to provide the Candidates with the elapsed 
time when they reach the six-mile point of the Foot March. The time from the official clock will 
be the only time used to officiate this event.  
Standards Candidates must carry 35 pounds of dry weight in their ruck-sack over the entire 
course of the Foot March. This weight is in addition to their personal equipment and water, 
which is worn and carried evenly distributed over their bodies. Units must have a calibrated scale 
at the end of the course to ensure that the Candidates finish the event with the required weight in 
their ruck-sack or the Unit conducts a layout of the required packing list totaling 35 pounds. Any 
Candidate who finishes with less than the required 35 pounds of dry weight in their ruck-sack or 
missing a piece of equipment from the layout will be eliminated from the EIB / ESB process, 
even if they completed the Foot March within the required time. The scales must be available to 
the Candidates at least one day prior to the Foot March. The 12-mile Foot March must be 
executed in the EIB / ESB uniform with approved boots. Units may add additional equipment at 
the direction of the EIB / ESB Board and Commander. No Candidate will proceed to the Final 
Event if they fail to complete the Foot March in three hours or less. Candidates failing the Foot 
March should be segregated in a separate holding area until they can be processed by the station 
NCOIC/OIC, followed by the EIB / ESB NCOIC/OIC for out-processing.  
Final event: Clear, disassemble, assemble, and perform a function check on M16/M4 series 
rifle/carbine 
Task basis: 130-CLC-0029-Perform a Function Check on an M16-Series Rifle/M4-Series 
Carbine  
97 
 
97 
Tasks:  Clear, disassemble, assemble, and perform a functions check on an M4/M16. 
Conditions:  You have just returned from a mission and have been directed to conduct 
maintenance on your carbine/rifle. 
Standards: Clear and disassemble within two minutes and 30 seconds.  Assemble and perform a 
functions check within two minutes and 30 seconds.  All tasks will be performed in sequence.  
This event is not re-testable. 
Requirements: Adequate graders to ensure candidates flow directly into their task following 
completion of the 12-mile Foot March with no more than a 5-minute rest period.  Starting 
configuration for the weapon will be:  free of ammunition, loaded with an empty magazine, bolt 
forward, on SAFE, with a sling.  Provide one poncho or other material per station for the 
candidates to test on that will prevent them from losing parts.  Candidates failing this task should 
be segregated in a separate holding area until they can be processed by the station OIC/NOIC, 
followed by the ESB OIC/NCOIC for out-processing.  Candidates who pass this event should be 
escorted to the weigh-in NCO for final processing 
Performance Measures: 
1. Clear and disassemble: 
(a) Clear the weapon: 
1) Point weapon in safe direction, ensure it is on SAFE, and remove the magazine. 
2) Lock the bolt open and return charging handle to the forward position. 
3) Ensure the receiver and chamber are free of ammo. 
4) Press the upper portion of the bolt catch to allow the bolt to go forward. 
(b) Disassemble the weapon, clearly separating the following parts, retaining sling and 
optics: 
1) Lower receiver and upper receiver.  Separated but connected by sling. 
2) Charging handle and bolt carrier.  Separated. 
3) Bolt, firing pin, bolt cam, and firing pin retaining pin.  Separated 
4) Buffer and buffer spring.  Separated. 
Note:  Time will stop when the candidate returns to the standing position with all parts of the 
weapon on the flat surface.  Candidate will start from the last position in the previous task. 
2. Assemble and perform functions check: 
3. Assemble the weapon. 
4. Perform a function check on the weapon: 
1) Place selector lever on SAFE.  Pull charging handle to rear and release. 
2) Pull trigger.  Hammer should not fall. 
3) Place selector lever on SEMI.  Pull trigger.  Hammer should fall. 
4) Hold trigger to the rear and charge the weapon. 
5) Release trigger with a slow, smooth motion, until fully forward.  An audible click should 
be heard. 
6) Pull trigger.  Hammer should fall. 
7) For BURST weapons: 
8) Place selector lever on BURST.  Pull charging handle to the rear and release. 
9) Squeeze trigger.  Hammer should fall. 
10) Hold trigger to the rear.  Charge weapon three times. 
11) Release trigger.  Squeeze trigger.  Hammer should fall. 
12) Charge the weapon again, place it on SAFE, and close the dust cover. 
13) For AUTO weapons: 
98 
 
98 
14) Place the selector switch on AUTO.  Pull charging handle to the rear and release. 
15) Squeeze the trigger.  Hammer should fall. 
16) Hold the trigger to the rear and cock the weapon again. 
17) Fully release the trigger then squeeze it again.  The hammer should not fall. 
18) Charge the weapon again, place it on SAFE, and close the dust cover. 
Final event 
PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
GO 
NO-GO 
1.  Clear the weapon. 
2.  Disassemble the weapon 
3.  Assemble the weapon 
4.  Perform a functions check 
 
